Title: Manuscript Template

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28362v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:02:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 25 

# Title ： A Foldable and Agile Soft Electromagnetic Robot for 

# Multimodal Navigation in Confined and Unstructured 

# Environments 

# Author Information 

# Affiliations 

State Key Laboratory of Fluid Power and Mechatronic Systems, Key Laboratory of  Soft Machines 

and Smart  Devices of Zhejiang Province,  Center for X -mechanics,  Department of  Engineering 

Mechanics, Zhejiang University,  Hangzhou 310027,  People’s Republic of  China. 

Zhihao Lv †, Xiaoyong Zhang †, Mengfan Zhang, Xiaoyu Song, Xingyue Liu, Yide Liu, Shaoxing Qu, 

Guoyong Mao* 

# Contributions 

G.M. and Z.L. conceived the project. Z.L. and X.Z. fabricated and characterized the M -SEMR. Z.L. 

developed the theoretical and numerical model. X.Z. built dynamic simulations for the robot model. Z.L., 

G.M., and X.Z. designed the experiments. Z.L. and G.M.  designed the figures and movies. M.Z. and X.S. 

assisted with the experiments. Z.L., X.Z., and G.M. analyzed the results and prepared and revised the 

manuscript. M.Z., X.S., X.L., Y.L., and S.Q. review & edit the paper. G.M. and S.Q. supervised the researc h. 

†These authors contributed equally to this work: Zhihao Lv, Xiaoyong Zhang 

# Corresponding author 

> *

Correspondence to:  Guoyong Mao 

> *

Corresponding author. Email:  guoyongmao@zju.edu.cn  (G.M.) 

# Abstract 

Multimodal locomotion is  crucial for an animal's adaptability in unstructured  wild  environments . Similarly ,

in  the human gastrointestinal tract, characterized by viscoelastic mucus, complex rugae, and narrow 

sphincters like the cardia,  multimodal locomotion  is also essential  for  a small -scale soft robot  to  conduct 

tasks . Here, we  introduce  a small -scale  compact , foldable , and  robust  soft electromagnetic robot (M -SEMR) 

with more than ni ne locomotion  modes  designed for  such a  scenario . Featuring a six -spoke e lastomer body Page 2 of 25 

embedded with liquid metal channels and driven by Laplace forces  under  a static  magnetic field , the M -

SEMR is capable of rapid transitions (< 0.35 s) among  different  locomotion modes. It achieves exceptional 

agility, including high -speed rolling (818 mm/s, 26 BL/s), omnidirectional crawling, jumping, and 

swimming. Notably, the robot can fold to reduce its volume by 79%, enabling it to traverse confined spaces. 

We furt her validate its navigation capabilities on complex terrains, including discrete obstacles, viscoelastic 

gelatin surfaces, viscous fluids, and simulated biological tissues. This system  offers a versatile strategy for 

developing high -mobility soft robots for future biomedical applications. 

# Introduction 

Multimodal locomotion enables organisms to adapt to complex environments, thereby enhancing their 

survival chances 1–7. Inspired by these biological systems, researchers have developed various small -scale 

robots capable of multimodal locomotion to achieve functional versatility 8–16  with applications in path 

navigation 17,18 , inspection and detection 19,20 , and targeted drug delivery 21 –23 . These capabilities are 

particularly critical for operation within confined and unstructured settings, such as the human 

gastrointestinal (GI) tract 24,25  which  poses significant challenges: viscoelastic mucus, complex rugae, and 

narrow sphincters (e.g., the cardia) often constrain the mobility of existing soft robots. Current devices 

frequently suffer from limited adaptability to terrain irregularities, leading  to functional failure during 

abrupt transitions or posture changes like flipping 9–11,15,17 . Therefore, developing a soft robot that combines 

a configurable structure with high mobility is essential for navigating such unstructured terrains 24 .

Achieving this goal requires a synergy of material selection and structural design. 

Previously, diverse smart materials, including shape memory alloys 10,26,27 /polymers 28 , pneumatic 

systems 29,30 , stimuli -responsive polymers 31 –33 ,34 , dielectric elastomers 35 –37 , and magnetic composites 23,8,14,38 ,

have been extensively investigated. However, their widespread application in such environments is often 

hindered by intrinsic limitations, ranging from slow response speeds and bulky tethering systems to safety 

concerns regarding high voltage or difficul ties in localized control. Soft electromagnetic actuators (SEMAs) 

driven by Laplace forces offer a compelling alternative, featuring millisecond -scale response, 

programmable deformations, and precise control 39 –41 .

Beyond materials, structural design is equally decisive. Crawling robots, typically employing bipedal 

or multi -legged structures, demonstrate excellent maneuverability. For instance, a bipedal robot developed 

by Mao et al. achieved a remarkable speed of 70  BL/s 11 , while a bio -inspired multi -legged design from Ji 

et al. exhibited omnidirectional mobility 17 . However, neither design is suitable for performing in complex 

terrains. Swimming robots typically feature streamlined, elongated bodies for propulsion in aquatic 

environments 42 , yet lack terrestrial mobility. Jumping robots, which utilize bistable mechanisms 43  or elastic Page 3 of 25 

energy storage systems 44  for rapid energy release, are effective for obstacle traversal but difficult for 

sustained locomotion. Rolling robots offer energy efficiency on flat surfaces, serving as a pathway to 

enhance mobility for robots, but typically struggle in unstructured env ironments and lack integration with 

other modes 30,32,34,36,37,45 –47 . For instance, a humidity -responsive robot developed by Xu et al. achieved a 

slow rolling speed of 5.8 BL/s 32 . In contrast, a dielectric elastomer -based design by Li et al. reached only 

0.98 BL/s on flat terrain 36 . While recent electromagnetic rollers achieved high speeds of 14 BL/s 48 , they 

remain limited to  only  a single locomotion mode, failing to address the complex navigational needs of the 

unstructured environment. 

Drawing inspiration from the Golden Wheel Spider and the Moroccan Flic -flac Spider, which utilize 

postural adjustments for rapid multimodal transitions between different modes 49,50 (Fig. S1A), we  developed 

a compact, foldable, and multimodal soft electromagnetic robot (M -SEMR) designed for robust navigation 

in unstructured environments like the human GI tract (Fig. 1A). The M -SEMR features a six -spoke 

elastomer structure embedded with liquid metal channels,  enhancing its ability to traverse undulating and 

viscous surfaces. Driven by Laplace forces within a global  static  magnetic field (such as an MRI 

environment), the robot is designed to fold significantly to traverse narrow constrai nts like the cardia, and 

subsequently unfold in the stomach to deliver drugs to target areas. By optimizing the actuation strategy 

and structure with a theoretical model, the M -SEMR can dynamically adjust among nine locomotion modes 

and postures (the most  abundant modes among small -scale robots), thereby demonstrating greater 

locomotion versatility than existing  small -scale  soft robots with multimodal locomotion (Figs. 1B -C). 

Specifically, the M -SEMR utilizes two distinct postures, standing and lying, to en able modes, including 

rolling, crawling, walking, jumping, swimming, steering, backing, and posture switching, all achieved 

through control strategies rather than extra reconfigurable actuators. Notably, the M -SEMR can achieve a 

maximum rolling speed of 81 8 mm/s, complete a posture switch in 0. 35  s, and perform in -place turning 

maneuvers. Furthermore, the robot demonstrated amphibious capabilities, including underwater 

deployment and underwater locomotion. The M -SEMR is also driven across various complex en vironments, 

including a gelatin gel surface, a discrete stepped terrain, viscous fluid, and a simulated gastric surface, 

providing a versatile solution for traversing viscoelastic mucus and complex rugae. Page 4 of 25 

Fig. 1.  Multimodal  locomotion and performance of  the  M-SEMR.  (A) The  M-SEMR  can be compactly 

folded into a cylindrical configuration  to reduce its  occupied  volume. Upon release, it  can  switch  actively 

between two postures.  The s tanding posture  supports rolling or walking  in  three  modes . The  lying posture 

supports U -actuation, V -actuation, or  crawling  with  three dual -module coordinated actuation  modes . (B)

Comparison of locomotion modalities between the M -SEMR and other reported  soft  robots  with 

multimodal locomotion . Details are provided in Supplementary  Table  S1. ( C) Relationship between  the 

maximum locomotion speed and body length  of  the M -SEMR, representative insects, rolling soft robots, 

and soft robots  with multimodal locomotion . Details are  provided in Supplementary Table S2. Page 5 of 25 

# Results 

# Design and fabrication 

The M -SEMR is a fully soft and modular robotic system  actuated in a  static  magnetic field , adopt ing 

a spoke configuration composed of six identical  driven modules , which  are soft electromagnetic actuators 39 ,

made of  a molded  elastomeric shell embedded  with  liquid metal channels  as soft  conductive  coils (Fig. 1 A).

Each module can be driven individually by Laplace forces resulting from a  sequence  of currents  applied  to 

the soft conductive coil.  The modules are assembled using mortise and tenon joints, which minimize 

redundant components and overall system mass (Fig.  SB-C). The  entire M -SEMR weighs only 3.84 g and 

exhibits an internal resistance of 0.19  per  module. 

To ensure  the  structural robustness  of M -SEMR  during  its  rolling, we  characterize  the mechanical 

response of the elastomer (Fig. S2A) and  conduct a buckling analysis of a single module. Because  the  whole 

body  of the rolling M -SEMR  is  periodically  supported by  a single module (Fig. S2 B), this  may result in a 

buckle that  lead s to motion destabilization.  Considering the buckling analysis  (Fig. S2 C), flexibility , and 

fabrication of the module, the  dimensions  of the  module  are  set to  16 mm × 14 mm × 2 mm (Fig. S 2D). 

And t he  cross -section of the  liquid metal channels is  a square  with  dimensions  of  0.5 mm × 0.4 mm . The 

gap  between adjacent  liquid  metal  channels  is  1 mm  to ensure electrical insulation and structural strength 

of a single module . The number  of modules in  an  M-SEMR  affect s its  rolling performance and terrain 

adaptability.  Adding more modules to one M -SEMR improves  the robot’s peripheral envelope roundness, 

making it closer to an ideal circle (Fig. S3A), thereby enhancing the smoothness and continuity of rolling 

(Fig. S3B) . Thus, too many modules  reduce  the  foldability and obstacle clearance  of the  rolling  M-SEMR .

Here, w e developed a quantitative model to bal ance these competing criteria, which led to the selection of 

a six -module design. (Fig. S3C). For actuation, the M -SEMR operates within a uniform magnetic field (Fig. 

S4) and is powered by a designed pulse width modulation (PWM) controller (Fig. S5). Each  module can 

be independently actuated using square wave current  with  adjustable frequency and duty cycle (Fig. S6), 

enabling diverse deformation , including bending, twisting, compression, and extension (Fig. S7). 

Experiments demonstrate that  such a design o f M -SEMR  supports  fast multimodal locomotion  and 

adaptability to complex terrains. 

# Rolling 

By maintaining a constant current and magnetic field direction while actuating the modules of the 

rolling M -SEMR sequentially, the resulting Laplace force vector is dynamically modulated to achieve 

targeted actuation across specific modules.  Based on the d ynamic analysis and actuation strategy 

optimization  (supplementary materials) , it is essential  for fast rolling  to  shorten the  startup  time . A simple Page 6 of 25 

solution is to  increase the current amplitude . As an example, when the pulse current increases  from 1 A  to 

1.5 A. the  startup  time  reduce s from  40 ms  to 20 ms (Fig. 2A), with a 30% decrease in the transition time 

between States 2 and 3 (Fig. 2B).  The motion process of the  rolling  M-SEMR involves complex  dynamic 

and finite  deformations, making it challenging to describe with a  simple theoretical  model.  Here, instead, 

we simplify the M -SEMR to be a fully  rigid  body  and build a dynamic theoretical model to ana lyze the 

behavior  of  the  M-SEMR  during  startup time. Details about this dynamic theoretical model  are  provided  in 

the Supplementary Materials. From the theoretical prediction, the minimal startup time is  38 ms, higher 

than 20 ms  from experiments  (Fig. S11).  From experimental observation in Fig. 2A,  the  soft module C2 

first  bends  itself , so  that the Laplace force contributes much more work in a short time than the prediction 

from the theoretical dynamic model.  To  better understand this , we  conducted  two simu lation s with  an ideal 

rigid -body model and a semi -rigid model incorporating flexible hinges (Fig. S12A  and Table S3 ). The rigid -

body model yielded a  startup time of  38 ms, matching  the result from dynamic  theo ry . The semi -rigid model 

predicted a  startup time of  24.5 ms, close to  the  experimental result.  Simulations comparing the two models 

confirmed that the flexible structure enables the actuator to perform an order of magnitude more work under 

an actuation duration of 20 ms (Fig. S12B), a result of the flexible structure. These findings highlight the 

im portance of structural compliance in the design of M -SEMR. 

To achieve rapid and continuous rolling  of the M -SEMR , square -wave  current s were sequentially 

applied to individual modules  from C2 to C1  in an anticlockwise order  (Movie S1) . We  defined the 

actuation  signals into two types:  global  actuation  signal and local  actuation  signal  (Fig. S5B ). The specific 

frequencies used for each type in different experiments are detailed in Table S4.  Fig. S13 shows 

representative displacement -time, velocity -time , and corresponding acceleration -time  curves of the M -

SEMR subjecte d to  various actuation frequencies  of square wave currents . The rolling speed increase s with 

actuation frequency  and  reach es  a maximum of 818 mm/s (26 BL/s) at 60 Hz (Fig. 2C and  Movie S1), 

representing the fastest rolling velocity reported for  small -scale  soft robot s. However, the pulse duration of 

the 60 -Hz square -wave current (the global actuation signal) is only 16.7 ms. This duration is shorter than 

the M -SEMR's startup time, making it unsuitable for the continuous rolling of the M -SEMR. As a result, 

the rolling success rate decreases sharply to 10% (Fig. 2D).  To overcome this issue, we implemented a 

hybrid actuation strategy combining  a short time of  low -frequency  actuation  with  a subsequent high -

frequency  actuation  (Fig. S14). This approach substantially improved the  rol ling  success rate to  80% ( Fig. 

2D ),  preserving a high rolling speed of 698 mm/s ( see the data of  60P  in  Fig.  S13D ). A  sequence of 

snapshot s of the  rolling  M-SEMR  is shown in Fig. 2E. During  such  rapid rolling, the robot exhibits 

intermittent jumping, which improves its adaptability to terrains with unstructured surfaces.  Balancing  the 

rolling  speed and locomotion stability  from Fig. 2D, a  global  actuation frequency of 40 Hz was selected  for 

the following demonstration  if there is no extra statement . with such a actuation frequency , the M -SEMR Page 7 of 25 

demonstrated robust rolling across a variety of substrates, including stainless steel, silicone, PMMA, 

polyurethane, sandpaper, and paper (Fig. 2F  and  Movie S 1). On all tested surfaces, the robot achieved  high 

speeds exceeding 500 mm/s  and  a maximum of 643 mm/s on paper.  The trajectory analysis, as shown in 

the displacement -time curves of  Fig. S15, demonstrates that M -SEM R achieves  extra  stable rolling on both 

polyurethane  and PMMA surfaces with high consistency .Page 8 of 25 

Fig. 2.  Performance of the  rolling  M-SEMR.  The  amplitude of the current is 1.5 A.  (A) Snapshots  of  the 

posture of  M-SEMR  subjected to a  20 -ms  pulse current.  (B) Time  costs  for the M -SEMR to  reach  different 

states with various  pulse duration s. The robot does not reach state 2 with a  10 -ms  pulse current . (C)

Maximum rolling velocity  vs.  actuation frequency  of the M -SEMR  subjected to a 1.5 A square wave current. 

(D) Success rate of the M -SEMR  rolling from  initial  state to state 3 as  a function of actuation frequency .

There are  40 measurements conducted for each actuation frequency . ( E) Snapshots  of the  rolling  M-SEMR 

subjected to a sequence of  60 H z square wave currents , followed by the  global actuation  signal s.  The  peak 

speed  is  818 mm/s ( 26  BL/s). ( F) Trajectories  (green lines)  of the M -SEMR’s  mass  center during continuous 

rolling on various surfaces, along with corresponding peak speeds  illustrated on the right side . All error 

bars represent the standard deviation of  five  measurements .

# Walking  and c rawling 

In addition to  the  rolling mode , the  M-SEMR  also  exhibits three walking modes : walk -1, walk -2, and walk -

3 (Fig. 3A -C, Movie S2) . In  walk -1, only  one top module, such as C1 or C2, of the M -SEMR is actuated. 

As an  example,  in Fig. 3A,  C1 bends  back and forth  under the Laplace force  that induced the rotation of 

the whole body,  producing an inchworm -like  gait to the left side  with an average speed of 16 mm/s  (Fig. 

S16A ).  If only C2 is actuated, the M -SEMR will walk towards the opposite side so that the walking direction 

of the M -SEMR can be well  controlled . In walk -2, only one bottom module is actuated, such as C5 in Fig. 

3B. When C5 is driven by the Laplace force and bend s up forward , C4 is the only support for the M -SEMR ,

which  induces  the bending of C4 and the forward movement of the whole M -SEMR. Once the  Laplace 

force  is  removed , the M -SEMR tends to  return  to its standing posture (Fig. S16B). With such  locomotion, 

the  M-SEMR  can  walk at a speed of 24.26 mm/s. Similar to the  Walk -1,  the M -SEMR can  switch  its walk 

direction by  switching  the  actuated  bottom module.  In Walk -3, the top two modules are actuated 

simultaneously using a pair of square wave currents, which have the same amplitude but a phase difference 

of half a period.  The  mechanism  of this mode is similar to that of walk -1.  In such a mode, the robot  can 

walk at a speed of 23.76 mm/s  (Fig. 3C,  Fig. S16C) , which  is  high er than that  of  walk -1. 

The rolling and walking modes are based on the bending deformation of modules. The M -SEMR can 

also use the twist of modules to achieve  crawling  locomotion.  Different from the standing posture of 

previous locomotion modes, crawling  requires  a lying posture.  The relationship between  the maximum 

torsion  angle and  the  duration  of a pulse current  was experimentally characterized . As shown in Figure 3D, 

the torsion angle increases with the pulse current duration and reaches a maximum of 41°once the duration 

exceeds 10 ms.  Accordingly, a 10 -ms actuation pulse was chosen to ensure rapid and sufficient deformation 

for fast straight movement. A 4 -ms pulse was chosen for a slight deformation, which is beneficial for M -

SEMR to turn in place.  As  Fig.  1A U -actuation shows , w hen only a module is actuated, the M -SEMR can Page 9 of 25 

move a short distance. Selective activation of modules C1 through C6 enables omnidirectional crawling, 

and the robot retains mobility even with partial actuator failure, demonstrating strong fault -toleran t

capabilities .

To  demonstrate the maneuverability of the M -SEMR in its lying posture, we developed three dual -

module actuation strategies, termed O -, M -, and P -actuation (inspired by the positional isomers of xylene, 

Fig. 3E -G) , which  depend  on the positions of activated modules . The fundamental principle in all strategies 

is the  polarization  difference between the two activated modules.  When the two modules are driven with 

an opposite  polarization , a combined force propels the robot forward or backward in a linear path.  By 

selectively activating different pairs of modules using these three strategies, the M -SEMR can achieve six -

direction crawling.  When the two modules are driven with an  identical  polarization, it  creates a torque that 

causes the robot to rotate clockwise or anticlockwise (Fig. S17).  We implemented th ese  two  pairs  of driving 

currents  with three dual -module actuations . O -actuation (Fig. 3E):  Two  adjacent modules (such as C2 and 

C3, 60°apart) are activated. The angle between their driving forces is 120°( opp osite polarization ) or 60° 

(identical polarization ), resulting in a slow linear forward crawling speed of 1.84 mm/s and a minimum 

turning radius of 6.4 mm (Movie S3). M -actuation (Fig. 3F): Two modules separated by 120°(such as C2 

and C4) are activated. This changes the angle between the forces to 60°( opposite polarization ) or 120° 

(identical polarization ), yielding a higher speed of 5.21 mm/s and a smaller turning radius of 3.7 mm (Movie 

S3). P -actuation (Fig. 3G): Two opposing modules (180°apart,  such as  C2 and C5) are activated. The force 

angles become 0°( opposite polarization ) or 180°( identical polarization ), enabling the highest speed of 

10.51 mm/s and in -place rotation (Movie S3).  This capability was conclusively demonstrated by controlling 

the  M-SEMR  to precisely trace a complex "ZJU" trajectory, which required seamless integration of 

forward/back ward motions and clockwise/anticlockwise rotations (Fig. 3H and Movie S3) .Page 10 of 25 

Fig. 3.  Characterization of w alking and crawling M -SEMR.  The driven current in this panel is 1.5 A. 

Time -displacement  curves  of  M-SEMR adopting  three walking strategies : w alk -1 (A), walk -2 (B), and 

walk -3 (C) in  a standing posture  with h ighlighted module s actuated (bottom right  corner ). The slope of the 

linear fit corresponds to the average speed.  (D) Dynamic response of the module torsion angle to single 

pulse -width variation in the M -SEMR lying posture.  Each  data  point  is  obtained from 20  measurements. 

Three dual -module coordinated actuation strategies : O-actuation  (E), M -actuation  (F), and P -actuation  (G)

in the M -SEMR lying posture. Trajectories during linear motion, time -displacement  curves  of linear 

movement, and turning trajectories for the  M-SEMR  under different driving strategies. Yellow -highlighted Page 11 of 25 

modules indicate the current actuation modules. Ro, Rm, and Rp represent the turning radii corresponding 

to their respective actuation strategies. ( H) The M -SEMR completes the “ZJU” trajectory using the P -

actuation strategy. 

# Posture switching 

In previous sections, we have introduced  nine  different types of locomotion modes of M -SEMR, which can 

be  divide d into two groups according to the  corresponding  postures, lying  and  standing. To freely  switch 

among all  nine  locomotion modes, it is important to  find  a control strategy  that enables  the M -SEMR to 

change  its posture easily  (Fig. 4A) . From experimental observation,  the  rolling  M-SEMR  enters an unstable 

oscillatory state  under high -frequency actuation.  When the current is cut off in such  an  unstab le state , the 

M-SEMR  naturally  falls  into the lying posture  by  gravity  in 350 ms (Fig. S18  and Movie S4 ).  From 

experiments , we also observe  that  the M -SEMR  can  switch  from the lying to the standing posture through 

a seq uence of different driven currents . During this process  of standing up , the  torque  from  the  Laplace 

force  plays  an  important  role , which  overcomes  the  gravitational torque, elevating the  center  of  mass  (CoM )

of the M -SEMR. A detailed analysis shows that each actuation module (C1 -C6) sequentially receives a 50 -

ms pulse. Initial a ctivation of C1 establishes  a ground contact at C5 and C6, forming a lever mechanism 

with the distal end serving as the pivot. Subsequent activation of C2 dynamically shifts the contact points 

to C6 and C1. After 300 ms, the robot re -establishes the standing posture (Fig. S19). Compare d with  the 

transition from standing to lying, the  switching  from lying to standing involves more complex dynamics. 

Kinematic decoupling identifies two primary  components: (1) sequential rotational actuation of individual 

modules and (2) elevation of the  mas s center  through coordinated body rotation about distal contact points. 

The first component, induced by signal transitions, contributes minimally to net mechanical work and can 

be neglected. The second component is modeled as a module transitioning from vertical t o horizontal, 

allowing magneto -mechanical analysis of torque balance and energy transfer (Fig. S20A -D).  Analytical 

results demonstrate that this rotational elevation reduces instantaneous power  by elongating the movement 

path of  the  mass center  whi le maintaining constant total work, thereby facilitating  an  energy -efficient 

transition (Fig. S20E -F) . In F ig. 4B , we plot the transition time from lying posture to standing posture as a 

function of  actuation  frequency,  indicat ing  that the time cost increases  as  the frequency  exceeds 20Hz. 

Additionally , it is difficult for the M -SEMR to  switch  from lying to standing  posture  at frequencies above 

60 Hz  (such as 70 Hz) .

To demonstrate the advantages of posture switching of the M -SEMR, we  design  a task  for the M -

SEMR to navigate  in a constrained environment ( Fig. 4C -H and Movie S4) in 46  s,  utilizing  two locomotion 

modes and two posture -switching actions.  A rectangular obstacle was set , leaving a passageway with a 

height of 26 mm,  to obstruct the  locomotion  of the M -SEMR toward the right side . It needs to be pointed Page 12 of 25 

out that the  height of  the M -SEMR is  27 mm  in the static state , and the maximum height of the rolling M -

SEMR is 31.5 mm  (Fig. 4C) . Considering this, the M -SEMR cannot cross through the 26 -mm passageway 

by rolling. Instead , the M -SEMR switched the posture from standing to lying in 0.5 s, actuated at 67 Hz, 

resulting in the height  of the M -SEMR  chang ed  to 16 mm (lower than  passageway ) (Fig. 4D). Once the 

transition was complete, the M -SEMR switched to the U -actuation mode and crawled through the 

passageway  in  29  s, actuated at 1 6.7  Hz (Figs. 4E -F). Upon reaching the right side, the  M-SEMR  switche d

to  its standing posture from a lying posture at  a global  actuation  frequency  of 20  Hz (Fig. 4G).  Then, 

subjected to  a 50 -ms pulse, the  M-SEMR  started a  new  roll ing process  (Fig. 4H).  A significant portion of 

the 46s task time is due to the manual switching of control commands. This duration could be substantially 

reduced by implementing automated control.  Through this task, t he M -SEMR demonstrated its adaptability 

in  constrained environments, thereby providing a robust approach for navigation in height -restricted terrains. 

The robustness of robots, encompassing both fault -tolerant and fail -safe strategies, is essential for their 

survival. The M -SEMR presented here exhibits remarkable robustness by integrating soft materials with a 

simple structure. As demonstrated in Fig. 3,  the M -SEMR can maintain locomotion even if only a single 

module is functional, exhibiting exceptional fault tolerance. Experimentally, we also confirmed its excellent 

resilience to physical damage; the prototype was compressed to 6 mm (20% of its height)  by a load and 

fully recovered its functionality after the load was removed ( Fig. 4 I,  Fig.  S21,  and  Movie S4). To further 

demonstrate its capabilities, we tested its locomotion under sustained compression in a narrow space where 

standard movement was impossible  (Fig. 4 J,  Movie S4). Here, we designed two signals to selectively 

activate module pairs (C2 & C4; C1 & C5), inducing periodic bending that propels the robot forward  (Fig. 

S22 ). Page 13 of 25 

Fig. 4.  Posture switching  and  navigat ing  through  a constrained  space  of the M -SEMR.  (A) Active 

posture switching  of the M -SEMR  in steps . (B) Relationship between transition time and actuation 

frequency during M -SEMR’s  posture  switch ing  from lying to standing posture. ( C) An obstacle is  placed 

above the M -SEMR’s forward path. ( D) The M -SEMR  switches  to the lying posture. ( E) The M -SEMR 

crawls through a narrow  passageway . ( F) The M -SEMR crawls a designated distance away from the 

passageway . ( G) The M -SEMR  switche s back to the standing posture.  (H) The M -SEMR  continues to roll .

(I) Robustness test showing the resilience of M -SEMR upon external loading. The robot resumes rolling 

after being pressed and fully flattened . (J) Locomotion of the M -SEMR under compression in a narrow 

space. 

# Under water  locomotion Page 14 of 25 

In addition to  navigating  on  land , the M -SEMR can also  realize underwater  locomot ion . Here, considering 

the future practical application of the M -SEMR  in  the  gastrointestinal tract , we also demonstrated a new 

deployment approach, a s shown in Fig. 5A,  where  the M -SEMR  (31.5 mm in diameter)  is  folded into a 

compact cylindrical configuration (14.5 mm in diameter) and packaged within a dissolvable polyvinyl 

alcohol (PVA) film.  It is noted that the M -SEMR ’s occupied volume is  reduced  to 21%  in  its  folded state 

compared to its unfolded state . This  approach  enables the  M-SEMR  to cross a narrow opening , such as  the 

gastric cardia, and then unfold autonomously in a water environment due to  the  dissolution  of  the  PVA film .

Fig. 5B  and  Movie S5  demonstrate  the  experimental  deployment  process  of the  folded  M-SEMR  to water 

through a tube ( 18 mm  in  inner diameter ), including releasing, dissolving, and  locomoting . The dissolving 

of the  PVA film  induced  the  release of the  stored elastic energy  in the M -SEMR, which is unfolded 

automatically . Subsequently,  subjected to a  5 Hz square wave current, the unfolded M -SEMR performed a 

rolling locomotion toward the right side. 

The water  environment  brings two new major factors  in  the  locomotion of the M -SEMR , including 

the additional  buoyancy  force and the high drag force of water, which induce new experimental  phenomena .

Experimentally , we found  that  the  M-SEMR  can actively switch between its two underwater locomotion 

modes: rolling and  V-actuation  (Fig. 1,  Fig. 5C , and Movie S5).  In these two modes, all modules of the M -

SEMR are driven in turns with a square wave current. The locomotion modes are highly frequency -

dependent. For a low global actuation frequency, 5 Hz or 10 Hz, the M -SEMR can only locomote  by  rollin g

(Fig. S2 3). It is difficult for the M -SEMR to roll underwater at frequencies higher than 10 Hz, such as 15Hz .

If the M -SEMR is in  a lying posture, it can automatically switch to  a standing posture and continue to roll. 

For a high global frequency, such as 40 Hz, the M -SEM R can only locomote with V -actuation. If the M -

SEMR is in  a standing posture, it can automatically switch to  a lying posture and continue to locomote with 

V-actuation. We also tested the M -SEMR with higher global actuation frequencies,  from  50 Hz  to  100 Hz 

with a step size of 10 Hz , which  shows  the same phenomenon ( Fig. S2 4 and  Movie  S5).  We  further 

quantified the performance of these modes.  The  M-SEMR 's posture transition time in water is reduced to 

200 ms, 150 ms faster than  that  on land (Fig. S2 3A).  From  our experiments, t he M -SEMR achieves  a

maximum  average rolling speed of 51.7 mm/s at  a global frequency of  5 Hz (Fig. S2 3C-D) and an average 

locomotion  speed of 35.1 mm/s  with V -actuation  at 50 Hz (Fig. S2 4). 

To demonstrate the potential applications of the M -SEMR , we  conducted two experiments  as shown 

in  Fig.  S25 . Here, w e designed a controllable drug  release module  (Fig. S2 5A ) that was integrated with the 

M-SEMR.  This module consists of a chamber, platinum electrodes, and a cover with a microchannel  in its 

center . The diameter of the microchannel is set to be 0.5 mm, which is small enough to seal the liquid drug 

in the chamber. In actuation, the electrodes are connected to a DC power supply for the electrolysi s of the 

water in the chamber. Along with the electrolysis, oxygen and hydrogen accumulate around the electrodes ,Page 15 of 25 

pushing  the liquid drug out of the chamber through the microchannel in the cover.  As  shown  in Fig.  S25 B

and Movie S6,  upon crawling to the target area, the M -SEMR releases its liquid drug by activating the drug 

module with a 10V voltage for 3 seconds. Following the release, the  M-SEMR  is controlled to  mix  the 

liquid drug with water . From the mechanism of the drug -release module, the drug delivery process can be 

well controlled for multiple releases.  As  evidenced  in Fig.  S25 C and Movie S6, the M -SEMR crawled  to 

three positions and released drugs with  various  dosages, demonstrating its controllable release capability. 

Fig. 5. Release, locomotion, and function of  an  M-SEMR in water.  (A) Schematic illustration of the M -

SEMR’s folding, encapsulation, and autonomous release. The folded  M-SEMR  is encapsulated with a 

dissolvable film. ( B) Snapshots of the folded M -SEMR at three stages: release, dissolution of the 

encapsulating film, and rolling locomotion. ( C) locomotion  with V -actuation , posture  switching , and rolling 

of the M -SEMR. 

# Off -road locomoti on of M -SEM RPage 16 of 25 

Most soft robots  are  operate d in constrained and unstructured  terrains , where environ mental variations 

significantly impact their locomotion performance. The M -SEMR, howev er, leveraging its actuation 

mechanism and structural design, demonstrates  environmental adaptability  across diverse terrains. 

To evaluate the M -SEMR’s environmental adaptability, we conducted a series of locomotion 

experiments on  various  terrains (Movie S7).  Results show that t he  M-SEMR  can  cross  a series of  small 

wedge blocks with a  base length  of  20 mm  and varying  inclination s from  6° to 38° , in  less than  0.6 s (Fig. 

S2 6).  Additionally, the M -SEMR can cross  a series of small  rectangular obstacles with heights ranging 

from 1 mm to 10 mm. This maximum height corresponds to approximately 0.37 times the  M-SEMR 's body 

height (Fig. S2 7A).  Besides, we built two periodic surfaces, a square shape and a sinusoidal shape, on which 

the M -SEMR  can  locomote  easily, as demonstrated in  Fig s.  6A, S2 7B, and  S2 8. Additionally, we prepared 

a 3D -printed stomach with a surface topography resembling the gastric rugae, where the M -SEMR easily 

traversed in only 0.5 s, achieving a speed comparable to that on flat terrain (Fig. S29). 

Further , we  created  a soft and adhesive surface  made of a  gelatin ge l,  on which  the M -SEMR achieved 

an average speed of 226.2 mm/s  at  20  Hz . This high speed is attributed to the M -SEMR's spoke structure, 

which minimizes the contact area during rolling and thereby effectively prevents adhesion to the gel surface 

(Fig. 6 B).  And from our  experience , most small -scale robots cannot even walk on such a viscus  surface  11 .

Then , we  tested  the locomotion of the M -SEMR  in a viscous  non -Newtonian  fluid  made of yogurt solution 

(Fig. S 30 ).  The  viscosity of  the yogurt solution is  800 mPa· s at 1 rad/s,  which is higher than that of  gastric 

mucus,  about  85 mPa· s51 . In this  viscous  fluid, the M -SEMR , driven  by a series of currents with a global 

frequency of  2 Hz , achieved a  roll ing speed of  34.5 mm/s . We also observed that the  rolling  locomotion 

was hindered at higher frequencies (such as 10 Hz)  because of the high  startup time of the rolling M -SEMR 

in viscous fluid  (Fig. 6 C).  Apart  from a solid surface or a liquid environment , the M -SEMR  can roll  from 

an aquatic to a terrestrial environment within 2 s, demonstrating its environmental adaptability (Fig. 6 D). 

Based  on these results, we further demonstrated the M -SEMR’s performance in diverse complex 

environments with varying structures and materials to comprehensively evaluate its potential  in  application s

(Movie S8).  For instance, we tested the M -SEMR within a 3D stomach model filled with viscous fluid to 

mimic the gastric environment. In this setting, the initially folded M -SEMR unfolded upon contact with 

fluid, navigated to a target area, and subsequently released the  liquid drug in a controlled manner  (Fig. 6 E).

These results demonstrated the robot's capability to function effectively in complex environments. Page 17 of 25 

Fig. 6.  Off -road locomotion  of M -SEMR.  (A) Snapshot of the M -SEMR  locomoting on  a periodic square -

shaped surface . (B) Snapshot of the M -SEMR locomoting on a viscoelastic gelatin  ge l surface . ( C) Snapshot 

of the M -SEMR  locomoting  in a viscous fluid. ( D) Snapshot of the M -SEMR  locomoting  from water to 

land.  (E) Snapshot of the M -SEMR  functioning  in  a 3D -print ed  stomach.  Scale bar is 10 mm. 

# Discussion 

In this work, we present a  a small -scale compact, foldable and robust soft electromagnetic robot  with  nine 

locomotion  modes, which owns the m ost abundant  mode s among small -scale robots, a ctuated exclusively 

by Laplace forces  within a  static  global magnetic field  generated by  electromagnet (such as an MRI  machine, 

which can greatly improve the  mechanical efficiency  of the M -SEMR 39 ) and constructed using a modular 

multi -module design.  The developed strategy in posture switching, between lying and standing in less than 

0.5 s, enables the M -SEMR  to change  its locomotion modes among rolling, three walks , three crawls , and 

locomotion with U , V-actuation  freely.  In the standing posture, the M -SEMR achieves a top rolling speed 

of 818 mm/s (26 BL/s), representing the fastest reported  rolling  performance among small -scale soft robots. 

It also maintains a speed of up to 500 mm/s across variou s substrate surfaces , including stainless steel, 

silicone, PMMA,  polyurethane , sandpaper, and paper .

Notably, the robot incorporates a foldable design that reduces its  occupied  volume to 21% of its 

original size, allowing it to access confined environments and subsequently deploy for task execution.  The 

M-SEMR also  show s high robustness in the experiments, enabling it to maintain locomotion with only a Page 18 of 25 

few modules and exhibiting resilience to physical damage , such as  a high degree of  compression .

Experiments  reveal  that  the  M-SEMR  with multimodal locomotion  can  cross  various complex terrains, 

including  discrete obstacles , gelatin -based tissue  surfaces , viscous fluids, and  simulated internal surface  of 

the stomach , highlighting its potential in biomedical diagnostics  and  search -and -rescue operations. 

Moreover , we  conducted  an  experiment  where  the robot  locomoted in  a 3D -printed stoma ch  model  and 

released  drugs at  a targeted position , highlighting  its feasibility in a simulated gastric environment. 

Despite these advancements, the current system faces several technical challenges.  First , the molding 

method and  handmade  fabrication  limit  further miniaturization , which can be solved with advanced 

technology  such as high -precision multi -material 3D printing . Second , the  curren t M -SEMR is still a 

tethered version , and  a custom design of micro -power and controller still needs to be developed . Third, 

even though we have demonstrated a series of locomotion modes and control  strateg ies for the M -SEMR, 

we believe there is still room to explore. Fourth , although this study demonstrates enhanced terra in 

adaptability , the dynamic al  response  of the M -SEMR in actuation  requires  further  systematic  investigation 

for better performance .

Crucially, the M -SEMR achieves multifunctionality without compromising the performance of 

individual functions, allowing a single robot to be repurposed for distinct tasks without the need for 

replacement 24 . This versatility is particularly advantageous for biomedical scenarios, positioning the 

demonstrated M -SEMR as a promising solution for future in vivo applications, ranging from targeted drug 

delivery and minimally invasive surgery to health monitoring. 

# Methods 

# Ma terials 

The M -SEMR’s architecture integrates six modular modules, each consisting of geometrically patterned 

soft elastomeric shells encapsulating liquid metal. The liquid metal , Galinstan  (Dongguan Huatai Metal 

Material Technology Co., Ltd. ), consists  of gallium, indium, and tin with a mass ratio of 68.5:21.5:10. The 

elastomer s were  prepared by mixing Ecoflex -30 (Smooth -On  Inc ) and PDMS  (Sylgard 184 , Dow Corning) 

solution at a  mass  ratio  of  10:1.  A silicone adhesive (Sil -Poxy, Smooth -On) was used to bond the elast omers. 

The central support column  in M -SEMR  was fabricated from  PLA (PLA,  Bambu Lab ). Additionally, a 

drug -release module was integrated into the robot system. This module was fabricated  using 3D printing 

with a photopolymerizable  resin (Rigid 10k resin, Formlabs) and features embedded inert platinum 

electrodes for water electrolysis. 

# Fabrication Page 19 of 25 

Step 1, mixing:  The Ecoflex -30 solution was first prepared by mixing Part A and Part B with a mass ratio 

of 1:1. Separately, the PDMS solution was formulated with a 10:1 mass ratio of base monomer to curing 

agent. These two solutions were then thoroughly mixed at a mass ra tio of 10:1 (Ecoflex -30: PDMS) using 

a planetary centrifugal mixer (BHZ -300, Beihong) at 2000 rpm for 3 minutes. Step 2, molding: The 

resulting mixture was poured into a PETG mold fabricated via  a 3D print er  (X1 Carbon, Bambu Lab). The 

mol d filled with solution  was placed in a vacuum chamber (100 mbar) for degassing for 3 minutes. An 

acrylic plate , which is fixed  with clips, was used to remove excess material  and  cover the mold. Step 3, 

curing: The mold was placed in an oven at 50° C and cured for 25 minutes to form the elastomeric substrate. 

Step 4, demolding: The cured elastomers were carefully separated from the mold using tweezers, yielding 

two types of componen ts: Elastomer 1 (with predefined microchannels) and Elastomer 2 (with a flat 

surface). Step 5, forming sealed modules: A silicone adhesive (Sil -Poxy, Smooth -On) was applied to the 

flat side of Elastomer 2, which was then aligned and bonded to Elastomer 1. The assembly was subsequently 

placed in an oven at 60 °C for 3 minutes to complete the bonding  process , resulting in individual  and  sealed 

elastomeric modules with empty microchannels. Step 6, liquid metal injection and wiring: For each module, 

liquid metal (Galinstan) was injected into its microchannels using a syringe with a 30G ne edle. Electrical 

wires were then connected to the injected liquid metal to form a functional actuation module. This was 

repeated for all six modules. Step 7, final assembly: The six functional modules were assembled into a 

multi -layer structure.  The s ilicone adhesive was applied to the bonding interface of one module, which was 

then aligned and attached to its adjacent module. This bonding process was repeated, and the entire 

assembly was cured at 60 °C to form the final six -layer elastomeric structure. Fina lly,  the  central support 

column , a 3D -printed PLA hexagonal prismatic support , was embedded at the center of the structure during 

the final assembly steps, completing the fabrication of the M -SEMR. More details can be found in the 

supplementary materials  (Fig. S 1).

# Control and power systems 

The control system includes a microcontroller (Uno Rev3, Arduino) and a 16 -channel PWM controller 

(PCA9685, Adafruit), which provides twelve independently programmable PWM signals for this setup. 

The drive system consists of six H -bridge motor driver modul es (L298N, ST), each powered by a dedicated, 

independently regulated DC power supply (IT6833A, ITECH; or UDP6720, UNI -T).  Every  H-bridge 

module , controlled by two PWM signals,  can output a programmable  bidirectional current with  a magnitude 

of up to 2 A. 

# Numerical calculation and simulation Page 20 of 25 

A custom  Python  script is used to o ptimiz e the module ’s  thickness of the M -SEMR, along with the 

calculation of Laplace force, torque, and work during a single rolling cycle.  We also developed  MATLAB 

scripts for t heoretical modeling  to  predict the  startup  time of a single rolling cycle,  and  the mechanical 

modeling of the rectangular driving module  (Fig.  S11 ). Results of both fully rigid and rigid -flexible coupled 

dynamic models were obtained using  the software  Adams  (Fig. S12).  Details of the simulation proc edure 

are provided in the supplementary materials. 

# Trajectory tracking and speed measurement 

The locomotion performances of the M -SEMR were recorded using  different  cameras  for  various 

experiments . (1) For rolling performance tests, a high -speed camera (ACS -1, NAC Image Technology) was 

used , recording at 2000 fps. The central black marker on the M -SEMR was tracked frame -by -frame using 

the  software  MVIEW (NAC Image Technology). A custom MATLAB script  is used to calculate  the 

instantaneous velocity  considering the  displacement across 10 frames (corresponding to a 10 ms interval) 

around the  time point. (2) Walking and crawling motions were recorded using a high -speed camera (ACS -

1) and a miniature camera module (DH -4k -003, Shenzhen Donghai Home Technology Co., Ltd.), 

respectively, both at 59.9 fps. The  M-SEMR ’s position was extracted using the software Tracker ( Version 

6.1.2, Open Source Physics). The velocity was calculated as the average speed over  a 33 -ms  interval  around 

each  recorded  time  point. (3) Underwater locomotion was recorded at 59.9 fps using a mirrorless camera 

(Z5, Nikon). Velocity was processed using the same method as  depicted  in (2). (4) Off -road locomotion in 

complex environments was recorded at 59.9 fps. Two cameras, the high -speed camera (ACS -1) and the 

mirrorless camera (Z5, Nikon), were used simultaneously to capture  from  different perspectives. Velocity 

analysis was performed following the method described in (2).  In Figs. 3, S13, S15, S2 3, S2 4, and S 31 , we 

plotted  displacement and velocity as  functions of time of M -SEMR's locomotion in diverse environments .

# Refere nces 

1.  Parker, G. H. The crawling of young loggerhead turtles toward the sea.  J. Exp. Zool.  36 , 322 –

331 (1922). 

2.  Lin, H. -T., Leisk, G. G. & Trimmer, B. GoQBot: A caterpillar -inspired soft -bodied rolling 

robot.  Bioinspir. Biomim.  6, 026007 (2011). 

3.  Koh, J. -S.  et al.  Jumping on water: Surface tension –dominated jumping of water striders and 

robotic insects.  Science  349 , 517 –521 (2015). Page 21 of 25 

4.  Hoyle, G. The leap of the grasshopper.  Sci. Am.  198 , 30 –35 (1958). 

5.  Mlot, N. J., Tovey, C. A. & Hu, D. L. Fire ants self -assemble into waterproof rafts to survive 

floods.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  108 , 7669 –7673 (2011). 

6.  Baines, R.  et al.  Multi -environment robotic transitions through adaptive morphogenesis. 

Nature  610 , 283 –289 (2022). 

7.  Grasso, D. A., Giannetti, D., Castracani, C., Spotti, F. A. & Mori, A. Rolling away: A novel 

context -dependent escape behaviour discovered in ants.  Sci. Rep.  10 , 3784 (2020). 

8.  Hu, W., Lum, G. Z., Mastrangeli, M. & Sitti, M. Small -scale soft -bodied robot with 

multimodal locomotion.  Nature  554 , 81 –85 (2018). 

9.  Chen, Y., Doshi, N., Goldberg, B., Wang, H. & Wood, R. J. Controllable water surface to 

underwater transition through electrowetting in a hybrid terrestrial -aquatic microrobot.  Nat. 

Commun.  9, 1 –11 (2018). 

10.  Zhakypov, Z., Mori, K., Hosoda, K. & Paik, J. Designing minimal and scalable insect -inspired 

multi -locomotion millirobots.  Nature  571 , 381 –386 (2019). 

11.  Mao, G.  et al.  Ultrafast small -scale soft electromagnetic robots.  Nat. Commun.  13 , 4456 (2022). 

12.  Lai, Y.  et al.  An agile multimodal microrobot with architected passively morphing wheels.  Sci. 

Adv.  10 , eadp1176 (2024). 

13.  Yang, X., Leanza, S., Ze, Q. & Zhao, R. R. Electromagnetic -stimulated untethered amphibious 

soft robot with multimodal locomotion.  Mater. Today  87 , 11 –19 (2025). 

14.  Li, H.  et al.  Programmable magnetic hydrogel robots with drug delivery and physiological 

sensing capabilities.  Mater. Today  87 , 66 –76 (2025). 

15.  Aubin, C. A.  et al.  Powerful, soft combustion actuators for insect -scale robots.  Science  381 ,

1212 –1217 (2023). Page 22 of 25 

16.  Yuan, Z., Ji, H., Huang, K., Chen, F. & Gu, G. Multimodal Locomotion of Soft Robots.  Adv. 

Intell. Syst.  n/a , e202500782. 

17.  Ji, X.  et al.  An autonomous untethered fast soft robotic insect driven by low -voltage dielectric 

elastomer actuators.  Sci. Robot.  4, eaaz6451 (2019). 

18.  Ke, X., Yong, H., Xu, F., Ding, H. & Wu, Z. Stenus -inspired, swift, and agile untethered 

insect -scale soft propulsors.  Nat. Commun.  15 , 1491 (2024). 

19.  Tang, D.  et al.  Bistable soft jumper capable of fast response and high takeoff velocity.  Sci. 

Robot.  9, eadm8484 (2024). 

20.  Ze, Q.  et al.  Soft robotic origami crawler.  Sci. Adv.  8, eabm7834 (2022). 

21.  Yang, Z., Xu, C., Lee, J. X. & Lum, G. Z. Magnetic miniature soft robot with reprogrammable 

drug -dispensing functionalities: Toward advanced targeted combination therapy.  Adv. Mater. 

36 , 2408750 (2024). 

22.  Chen, Z.  et al.  A magnetic multi -layer soft robot for on -demand targeted adhesion.  Nat. 

Commun.  15 , 644 (2024). 

23.  Ze, Q.  et al.  Spinning -enabled wireless amphibious origami millirobot.  Nat. Commun.  13 ,

3118 (2022). 

24.  Li, M., Pal, A., Aghakhani, A., Pena -Francesch, A. & Sitti, M. Soft actuators for real -world 

applications.  Nat. Rev. Mater.  7, 235 –249 (2021). 

25.  Rus, D. & Tolley, M. T. Design, fabrication and control of soft robots.  Nature  521 , 467 –475 

(2015). 

26.  Huang, X.  et al.  Highly dynamic shape memory alloy actuator for fast moving soft robots.  Adv. 

Mater. Technol.  4, 1800540 (2019). Page 23 of 25 

27.  Huang, W., Huang, X., Majidi, C. & Jawed, M. K. Dynamic simulation of articulated soft 

robots.  Nat. Commun.  11 , 2233 (2020). 

28.  Melly, S. K., Liu, L., Liu, Y. & Leng, J. Active composites based on shape memory polymers: 

overview, fabrication methods, applications, and future prospects.  J. Mater. Sci.  55 , 10975 –

11051 (2020). 

29.  Gong, S.  et al.  An intelligent spinal soft robot with self -sensing adaptability.  The Innovation 

5, 100640 (2024). 

30.  Yang, P.  et al.  A rolling soft robot driven by local snap -through buckling.  Soft Robot. 

https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2024.0115 (2024) doi:10.1089/soro.2024.0115. 

31.  Wu, S., Baker, G. L., Yin, J. & Zhu, Y. Fast Thermal Actuators for Soft Robotics.  Soft Robot. 

9, 1031 –1039 (2022). 

32.  Xu, C.  et al.  An ultra -fast rolling double -helical robot driven by constant humidity.  Adv. Sci. 

12 , 2500577 (2025). 

33.  Zhang, S.  et al.  A pH -responsive supramolecular polymer gel as an enteric elastomer for use 

in gastric devices.  Nat. Mater.  14 , 1065 –1071 (2015). 

34.  Zeng, L.  et al.  Glow -worm -inspired fluorescent self -healing actuators for soft robot and 

reconfigurable information encryption.  Adv. Mater.  37 , 2501007 (2025). 

35.  Feng, W.  et al.  A large -strain and ultrahigh energy density dielectric elastomer for fast moving 

soft robot.  Nat. Commun.  15 , 4222 (2024). 

36.  Li, W. -B., Zhang, W. -M., Zou, H. -X., Peng, Z. -K. & Meng, G. A fast rolling soft robot driven 

by dielectric elastomer.  IEEEASME Trans. Mechatron.  23 , 1630 –1640 (2018). 

37.  Yang, Y.  et al.  Muscle -inspired soft robots based on bilateral dielectric elastomer actuators. 

Microsyst. Nanoeng.  9, 124 (2023). Page 24 of 25 

38.  Li, R.  et al.  Femtosecond laser -regulated microstructures for on -demand functionalization of 

magnetic milli -robots.  Small Struct.  n/a , 2500114 (2025). 

39.  Mao, G.  et al.  Soft electromagnetic actuators.  Sci. Adv.  6, eabc0251 (2020). 

40.  Aksoy, B. & Shea, H. Multistable shape programming of variable -stiffness electromagnetic 

devices.  Sci. Adv.  8, eabk0543 (2022). 

41.  Li, W.  et al.  Self -vectoring electromagnetic soft robots with high operational dimensionality. 

Nat. Commun.  14 , 182 (2023). 

42.  Wang, Y., Chen, H., Law, J., Du, X. & Yu, J. Ultrafast Miniature Robotic Swimmers with 

Upstream Motility.  Cyborg Bionic Syst.  4, 0015 (2023). 

43.  Yang, Y. & Wang, Y. Snapping for 4D‐Printed Insect‐Scale Metal‐Jumper.  Adv. Sci.  2307088 

(2023) doi:10.1002/advs.202307088. 

44.  Wang, X.  et al.  Beyond surface tension -dominated water surface jumping.  Nat. Commun.  16 ,

3034 (2025). 

45.  Huang, X.  et al.  Highly dynamic shape memory alloy actuator for fast moving soft robots.  Adv. 

Mater. Technol.  4, 1800540 (2019). 

46.  Wu, J.  et al.  A wheeled robot driven by a liquid‐metal droplet.  Adv. Mater.  30 , 1805039 (2018). 

47.  Xu, L.  et al.  Programming Motion into Materials Using Electricity -Driven Liquid Crystal 

Elastomer Actuators.  Soft Robot.  11 , 464 –472 (2024). 

48.  Li, N.  et al.  Transformable 3D curved high -density liquid metal coils  – an integrated unit for 

general soft actuation, sensing and communication.  Nat. Commun.  15 , 7679 (2024). 

49.  Jä ger, P. Cebrennus Simon, 1880 (Araneae: Sparassidae): a revisionary up -date with the 

description of four new species and an updated identification key for all species.  Zootaxa  3790 ,

319 –356 (2014). Page 25 of 25 

50.  Western, A., Haghshenas -Jaryani, M. & Hassanalian, M. Golden wheel spider -inspired rolling 

robots for planetary exploration.  Acta Astronaut.  204 , 34 –48 (2023). 

51.  Lai, S. K., Wang, Y. -Y., Wirtz, D. & Hanes, J. Micro - and macrorheology of mucus.  Adv. 

Drug Deliv. Rev.  61 , 86 –100 (2009). 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Prof. Wei Yang , Prof. Tiefeng Li, and Prof.  Pei  Zhao  for fruitful discussions.  The authors also 

thank  Dr.  Qiyang Li for his technical assistance in the  rheological  experiment using the  Discovery HR -20 

analyzer ( TA Instruments , USA). We use generative AI and  AI -assisted discussion  technologies in the 

writing process to improve the readability and language of the work. 

# Funding: 

National Key R&D Program of China under Grants Nos. 2023YFB4704700 

National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant Nos. 12372167, 12321002 

111 Project of China (No. B21034) 

# Ethics declarations 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

# Data Availability 

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions of the paper are available in the paper or the Supplementary 

Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.