Title: 2603.28411v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28411v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:05:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
1

# Monol ithic piezo -magnonic -MEMS for efficient modulation of RF signals 

M. Cocconcelli, A. Angotti, P. Florio, N. Pel lizzi , F. Maspero, R. Bertacco 

Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, Via G. Colombo 81, 20133 Milano (Ital y) 

Abstract: 

Compact, low -power , analog RF components are essential for next generation microwave electronics 

and wireless systems. We demonstrate an all -electric integrated piezo -magnonic 

microelectromechanical system that enable s efficient voltage control of GHz spin wave signals via 

magnetoelastic coupling . Exploiting the large strain on a CoFeB magnonic waveguide integrated on 

a silicon bridge with piezoelectric actuation , very large values of the magnetoelectric field (up to 30 

mT at 30 V) are obtained, thus achieving reversible phase and amplitude control of propagating spin 

waves. In the static regime we achieve either up to 4 π phase modulation or ≈50 dB amplitude 

attenuation with drive voltages below 20 V at 7 GHz. Leveraging the bridge’s first bending resonance 

(≈17 kHz) yields resonant enhancement of the phase modulation efficiency . This allow s to achieve 

2π phase swing with just 2.2 V drive and power consumption ≈ 6 μW. Our results highlight piezo -

magnonic -MEMS as a promising new class of devices for reconfigurable RF front ends and analog 

signal processors. 2

Wireless communication is one of the primary technological drivers of modern society. With the rise 

of 5G —and the upcoming deployment of 6G —networks and the expansion of the Internet of Things 

(IoT), the volume of transferred and processed data is increasi ng exponentially. 1 More generally, RF 

applications are becoming i ncreasingly pervasive across domains such as monitoring, automotive 

systems, medicine and security . 2,3 Magnonics, the field of magnetism dealing with spin -waves (SW) 

and related quasi -particles (magnons), has emerged as a promising technology for next -generation 

microwave systems . In fact, it can offer highly innovative solutions by leveraging the intrinsic 

tunability of spin waves , based on the strong dependence of the band dispersion on the magnetic bias 

field H e.4,5,6,7,8,9 Magnonic devices are ideal for edge processing of data encoded in RF signals since 

they allow for a direct physical transfer of an electromagnetic signal into SW without any frequency 

conversion . Furthermore, magnonics is highly versatile, enabling a broad range of computational 

approaches. Spin -wave platforms have been proposed and demonstrated for Boolean logic, 10 

neuromorphic computing, 11 and reservoir computing. 12 ,13 Crucial for this is the wave -nature and 

nonlinearity of SW , providing computing functionalities via interference and nonlinear interaction of 

the magnons modes. 14 

Th at said , in the near term, practical applications of magnonics are expected in RF signal processing. 

Recently, a SW band -pass filter for 6G communication embedded in a radio receiver has been 

demonstrated, exhibiting features that mak e it appealing for application in RF -front end modules. 15 

Th e work by Devitt et al. on one side demonstrates the high potential of magnonics, but on the other 

side evidences the obstacles for a wide spread of this technology, mainly related to the integration in 

standalone and reconfigurable micro electronic devices . Suitable strategies for integrating tunable, 

low -power sources of the bias magnetic field H0 are still missing , as well as methods for varying said 

field to tune the RF frequency response. In a recent paper we reported on a first example of standalone 

integrated magnonic device , featuring integrated permanent micromagnet s16 coupled to magnetic flux 

concentrators which allow to tune the bias field on a CoFeB waveguide. 17 In that case the tuning was 

done by design, setting the distance between the permanent micromagnets and the flux concentrators, 

and it was suggested that the real time reconfigurability could be implemented using a Micro -Electro -

Mechanical Systems (MEMS ) to vary that distance in a hybrid magnonic -MEMS device. 

Here we propose an alternative approach that uses magnetocrystalline anisotropy to define the 

effective field H 0 and leverages magnetoelastic coupling to modulate it, thereby enabling dynamic 

tunability of the device frequency response. 18 We demonstrate a highly efficient static and dynamic 

phase /amplitude modulation in compact and low -power device s realized with planar technology 

suitable for integration in conventional electronic chips . Crucial to this is the fabrication of a 3

magnonic waveguide directly on a suspended piezo -bridge , allowing to produce extremely large 

values of strain and to exploit the mechanical resonance to amplify the modulation efficiency.  

> Concept of SW modulation via magnetoelastic coupling in suspended piezo -bridges

Inverse magnetostriction —the generation of an effective magnetic field in a ferromagnet under 

stress —is a long -established route to electrically tune magnetic properties. 19 The standard approach 

couples a piezoelectric actuator to a ferromagnet so that electrically generated strain produces a 

magnetoelastic effective field H!" .20 ,21 For cubic systems , such as CoFeB used for waveguides in the 

present work , H!" is given by: 

𝐻 #$ = − %

> &!#"

&

𝐵 '𝑚 (𝜀 (( + 𝐵 %+𝑚 )𝜀 () + 𝑚 *𝜀 (* ,

𝐵 '𝑚 )𝜀 )) + 𝐵 %+𝑚 (𝜀 () + 𝑚 *𝜀 )* ,

𝐵 '𝑚 *𝜀 ** + 𝐵 %+𝑚 (𝜀 (* + 𝑚 )𝜀 )* ,

- (1) 

where 𝜇 + is the vacuum permeability, 𝑀 , the saturation magnetization, 𝐵 ' and 𝐵 % the magnetoelastic 

coefficients, 𝑚 (,),* the reduced magnetization components, and 𝜀 ./ the strain tensor components . For 

CoFeB ( 𝐵 ', 𝐵 % ∼ 10 0 𝐽 𝑚 12, 𝑀 , ≈ 1.27 × 10 0𝐴 𝑚 1') a field change of ~10 mT requires strain on 

the o rder of 10 12. Such values are difficult to achieve in macroscopic substrate -clamped structures. 22 

Partially released piezoelectrics can reach this regime, but typically only for narrow structures 

limiting the cross section of the magnonic conduit and thus the transmitted spin -wave power .23 

Reported magnetoelectric coupling coefficient are quite high (1.3 mT/V) but the applied voltages 

cannot often exceed a few volts, leading to magnetoelectric fields < 5 mT. 

To overcome these limitations, in this work we use MEMS made of suspended piezoelectric bridges 

with a central constriction acting as a strain concentrator .24 As shown in Fig. 1a , each silicon bridge 

incorporates four lead zirconate titanate (PZT) patches connected in parallel . A voltage between the 

top and bottom electrodes sandwiching a 2 μm PZT layer induces vertical bending via 

the 𝑑 2' coefficient ( inset of Fig. 1c ). At the constriction, applying 𝑉 3 = 10 V to the piezo produces a 

tensile strain of ≈ 1.5x10 -3 over an area of ≈50 × 50 μm 2, sufficient to accommodate a 20 μm -wide 

CoFeB magnonic waveguide (40 nm thick) with meander antennas (red and yellow regions in Fig. 

1b). 

The measured voltage -dependent out -of -plane displacement (Dz) of the constriction is reported 

in Fig. 1c . A linear behavior is found between 5 and 25 V, where the slope is » 0.3 μm/V, while the 

deviations from linearity at low and hi gh voltages depend on the hysteretic behaviour of the piezo 

and on the pooling procedure. The spatial distribution of the strain components at 𝑉 3 = 10 V, as 

resulting from COMSOL Multiphysics simulations with Dz corresponding to the experimental value 4

for 10 V applied , is shown in Fig. 1f . Between the antennas a nearly uniform tensile strain 𝜀 (( ≈

1.5 × 10 12 is found , while 𝜀 )) ≈ −4 × 10 14 and 𝜀 ** ≈ −1 × 10 14. Among shear terms, 

only 𝜀 () reaches the 10 14 range, while others are negligible. To evaluate the magnetoelastic field, 

the equilibrium magnetic configuration must be defined. The CoFeB film was grown under a 27 mT 

field to induce uniaxial anisotropy along the transverse (y) direction. Angular resolved ferromagnetic 

resonance (FMR) measurements on reference films yield a value of the anisotropy constant 𝐾 56 =

2 × 10 4 J m-3, corresponding to an anisotropy field Han = 2 ×Kan /μ0Ms = 33 mT. Upon application of 

a positive external field H e along y, the transverse anisotropy overcomes shape anisotropy and 

stabiliz es an almost uniform remanent magnetization along 𝑦 , as confirmed by micromagnetic 

simulations reported in Fig. 1g . From Eq. 1, neglecting terms containing mx, m z, 𝜀 () and 𝜀 )* , the 

magnetoelastic field for small applied voltages can be written as 𝑯 #$ = − %7#89$:$$ ;

> &!#"

𝑦 B. Noteworthy, 

as both 𝐵 ' and 𝜀 )) are negative , HME opposes the remanent magnetization (see Fig. 1d) . Panel 1h 

shows a color map of the magnetoelastic field obtained from the full Eq. 1 , using B2 = - B1 = 1.6 ·10 7

J m-3 consistent with data in literature and yielding a good fit to the broadband spectroscopy 

data .23 ,25 ,26 A nearly uniform negative t ransverse field μ+H!" ,< ≈ −10 mT at 10 V in the area 

between the antennas is found ( Fig. 1h ). In the Damon –Eshbach (DE) configuration used in this work 

(wave vector k of SWs perpendicular to the equilibrium magnetization M 0), the HME generated by 

strain therefore reduces the total transverse effective field and shifts the spin -wave dispersion to lower 

frequencies. 

The effect on SW transmission is illustrated in Fig. 1e . Shown are the analytical dispersion 27 for DE 

SW in the region between the antennas, calculated for H e = 0 using the uniform HME and M estimated 

above , in case of V= = 0 (no strain) and 10 V (tensile strain) . The excitation efficiency of the meander 

antennas is also reported with dashed line. The whole frequency band related to the fundamental 

mode , defined by the first peak in the antenna excitation efficiency (grey area in panel 1e) , shifts 

downwards by ~0.6 GHz while produc ing a change in wave vector at fixed excitation frequency. Th is 

voltage -controlled wave -vector variation enables the tuning of phase accumulation, Δ𝜙 = Δ𝑘 ∙𝑑 , as 

illustrated in Fig. 1e for a central frequency of 7 GHz that will be used for the experimental validation 

of this concept . By further increasing the piezo voltage, both the negative y -component H ME y and also 

the x -component 𝐻 #$( = − %7%89$:&$ ;

> &!#"

tend s to break the conduit into magnetic domains (see Figure 

3) suppress ing SW propagation. As detailed in the following , for low voltages the device behaves as 

a phase shifter, while for higher voltages it implement s a RF s witch. 5 

> Experimental determination of the magnetoelectric coefficien t from SW propagation

Figure 2 reports the broadband spectroscopy characterization of DE SW in the CoFeB conduit as a 

function of the applied transverse field H e, for Vp = 0 V, measured on a device with 30 μm edge -to -

edge distance between the meander antennas . In panel 2a the color map of the imaginary part of the 

scattering parameter S 21 is reported as a function of frequency and He for Vp = 0 V. The map is almost 

symmetric with respect to H e, apart from the non -reciprocity of DE SW which reflects in the slightly 

reduced intensity of the left part. Interestingly, the signal persists also for zero applied field, because 

of the transverse anisotropy set during CoFeB deposition. The coercive field measured by 

microMOKE is 1.5 mT. This is enough to operate the device without external applied magnetic fields ,

i.e. in a “standalone” configuration .

In panel 2b we show with continuous line the Im( S21 ) spectra recorded at Vp = 0 V, upon removal of 

the direct electromagnetic coupling for some values of the applied magnetic field from 1 to 25 mT .

These spectra have been compared with another set recorded at variable Vp and fixed H e=25 mT, t o

calibrate our system and find a value of the converse magnetoelectric coefficient αME = μ0·dH ME /dV. 

The dashed curves reported in Figure 2 correspond to the Im( S21 ) recorded at H e=25 mT and Vp values 

(reported within bracket s) that allow us to reproduce the continuous lines. In fact, the application of 

a positive Vp creates a negative y -component of H ME which is equivalent to a reduction of the external 

field. For each couple of spectra, the magnitude of H ME created by that specific Vp at He = 0 mT can 

be obtained from the difference between 25 mT and the He value needed to reproduce the same 

spectrum at Vp = 0 V. The estimated 𝐻 #$ increases almost linearly with Vp reaching 24 mT at 24 V .

Slight deviations below 10 V reflect the nonlinear displacement –voltage relation (Fig. 1c). The static 

converse magnetoelectric coefficient is αME ~ 1 mT /V , comparable to the best values reported in the 

literature .23 ,28 ,29 ,30 However, the magnetoelectric fields used in this work (up to ~30 mT) represent 

record values for spintronic and magnonic devices with relatively thick ferromagnetic layers (tens of 

nm). 31 Larger values have been reported only in case of ultrathin ferromagnets and in the context of 

voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy .32 ,33 ,34 ,35 Note that, since the MEMS can tolerate drive 

voltages up to 100 V, high field strengths on the order of ≈100 mT could be attained. 

> Static phase and amplitude modulation of the spin -wave signal

Figure 3 a show s a color map of the Im( S21 (f)) measured at a fixed external applied field of 25 mT, 

analogous to that shown in Figure 2a ; here, however, the horizontal axis is the piezo drive Vp (from 

0 to 30 V in 2 V steps) rather than the external magnetic field. The dashed curves in Figure 2b 6

correspond to sections of this color map at selected values of Vp. Increasing Vp induces a progressive 

downward frequency shift of the bands associated with the fundamental and first width modes, 

consistent with the negative y -component of the magnetoelastic effective field. A pronounced 

frequency shift of ≈3 GHz is observed, demonstra ting highly efficient electrical modulation of 

spin -wave propagation in the device. 

Figure 3b reports the corresponding map measured at zero external magnetic field, i.e. in the 

“standalone” configuration used in the following. The downward bending of the isophase lines 

induce d by the magnetoelectric field is clearly visible up to about 12 V. Above this value the 

magnitude of the SW signal drops, while the isophase lines become almost horizontal. Two regimes 

can be distinguished: (i) 𝑉 3 < 12 V - the dispersion shifts while the SW amplitude remains essentially 

unchanged; (ii) 𝑉 3 > 12 V - the SW amplitude rapidly diminishes, preventing accurate phase 

determination . This clearly emerges from Figure 3c , were we show Im(S 21 (f)) spectra for Vp between 

0 and 20 V. A substantial downward frequency shift (~1.5 GHz) of the SW band is seen, looking at 

the position of the FMR frequency which corresponds to the low -frequency onset of the oscillations. 

Figure 3d shows t he corresponding unwrapped phase FSW . Within the spin -wave band Φ SW decreases 

nearly linearly with frequency (apart from small residual undulations due to interference with the 

direct electromagnetic signal), as expected from Φ SW (f) = k(f)·d, where k(f) is the dispersion relation 

inverse and d the antenna separation, considering that k(f) is almost linear in this frequency range. 

Noteworthy, we observe that the SW phase at fixed frequency is largely modulated by Vp. Figure 3 e

show s the phase variation DF at 7 GHz - a quite central frequency for the SW bands in the 0 -14 V

range - induced by the application of an increasing Vp. The phase reaches a maximum shift of ≈750° 

and exhibits an approximately linear dependence above ~4 V (near the coercive voltage of the piezo) 

corresponding to a phase modulation coefficient 𝛾 = ∆𝜙 /∆𝑉 » 62 deg/V. 

The overall behaviour is summarized in Figure 3 f, reporting the amplitude and phase of S 21 at 7 GHz 

for different Vp. In the 0 -12 V range the device produces a highly efficient phase modulation at 

essentially constant amplitude, as expected for an ideal phase shifter. Above ~12 V the response 

changes markedly : the SW amplitude falls sharply (≈50 dB between 12 and 20 V), while the phase 

tends to level off and ultimately becomes ill -defined due to the very low signal -to -noise ratio . In this 

regime the device effectively operates as an RF switch, producing strong amplitude modulation at 

fixed frequency. This is partially due to the large frequency shift, which ultimately can exceed the 

SW bandwidth, but also to th e fact that the increasing magnetoelastic field gradually breaks the single 

domain configuration between the two antennas. Static micro -MOKE images (Fig. 3g –i) support this 

interpretation : a single -domain state (Fig. 3g) persists up to ~ 14 V while a vertical domain wall 

between the antennas appears at 20 V . At 30 V the wall evolves into an S -shaped profile, consistent 7

with increasing longitudinal magnetoelastic contributions from 𝜀 () . Domain formation disrupts 

coherent propagation and partially account for the amplitude suppression. Notably, after applying 

voltages that suppress transmission (~20V), reducing V p below 12 V restores the single -domain state 

and recoveres spin -wave transmission. These reversible, repeatable transitions indicate the device can 

function as an RF switch in the 12 –20 V range .

Time -resolved MOKE (TR -MOKE) imaging corroborates broadband spectroscopy via real -space 

measurements. Experiments were performed on a nominally identical d evice , apart from a reduced 

antenna separation (20 μm) which is not relevant for MOKE experiments with optical detection .

Figure 3l shows a m z snapshot of propagating spin waves at 𝑉 3 = 6 V and 7 GHz under zero external 

field. The nearly uniform profile along the transverse direction confirms excitation of the fundamental 

DE mode. Linecuts from TR -MOKE maps ( Fig ure 3m ) reveal a systematic reduction of the 

wavelength with increasing 𝑉 3, as summarized in Figure 3n . This corresponds to an increase in 

wavevector and hence a larger accumulated phase during propagation, in excellent agreement with 

the phase modulation observed electrically (Fig. 3e).   

> Dynamic modulation enhanced by mechanical resonance

To probe dynamic operation, we applied a sinusoidal drive 𝐴 3sin (2𝜋 𝑓 #𝑡 ) to the piezo -MEMS, 

superimposed on a VDC = 10 V bias (to operate the bridge in the linear regime), and monitored the 

phase of 𝑆 %' at a fixed carrier frequency of 7 GHz. Under the experimentally observed linear phase 

response (Fig. 3e), the transmitted spin -wave phase can be expressed as 𝜙 (𝑡 ) = 𝜙 + + 𝛽 sin (2𝜋 𝑓 #𝑡 ),

where 

b is the phase modulation index proportional to the phase modulation coefficient (b = g·Ap).

Experiments a t low modulation frequency ( 𝑓 # = 2 Hz) were carried out on the very same device used 

for VNA experiments reported in Figure 3, with an edge -to -edge distance between antennas of 30 

microns . In this “slow -modulation” regime we could track the phase of S21 in real time, as shown in 

Fig. 4a. T he phase oscillates sinusoidally with negligible distortion and 𝛽 scales linearly with the AC 

amplitude Ap (Fig. 4b), confirming the linear operation. A full 2𝜋 peak phase modulation (𝛽 = 𝜋 ) is 

obtained for Ap=4 V , corresponding to a phase modulation coeffici ent g = DF/DV of 45 deg/V in nice 

agreement with the static coefficient derived from Fig. 3e. 

The frequency dependence of 𝛽 was then measured by sweeping 𝑓 # from 1 to 50 kHz , encompassing 

the mechanical resonance of the first bending mode. Both the electrical characterization and laser 

vibrometry investigation of the dynamic modes of the bridge identify a fundamental bending mode 

at 17.2 kHz and a higher -frequency hybrid mode near 84 kHz. However, the largest mechanical 

response occurs at the first bending mode , to which the magnetoelectric coupling analysis presented 8

above directly applies . Accordingly, we concentrate on this mode in the following. Measurements 

were performed on a nominally identical device to that of Figure 3, but with reduced stripline antenna 

separation ( edge -to edge 12 μm) to enhance the signal to noise ratio and enable real -time monitoring 

of the S21 phase at frequencies up to 50 kHz . This was necessary because the VNA 

intermediate -frequency bandwidth (IFBW) could not be reduced below 1 MHz at high modulation 

rates, thus limiting noise filtering compared with the 1 kHz IFBW used for low -frequency (2 Hz) 

measurements . The modulation amplitude was A p=0.4 V, while the applied DC bias was 5 V, due to 

some instrument constraints in these experiments . This corresponds to a piezo -MEMS operation near 

the lower edge of its linear regime, so the effective phase -modulation coefficient γ is expect ed to be 

reduced relative to higher bias conditions ensuring full linearity. 

Figure 4b compares the phase modulation index 𝛽 (𝑓 #) and the mechanical resonance curve, 

normalized to show their superposition . As expected also from previous works on macroscopic 

systems , b follows the mechanical resonance curve of the MEMS, with a clear enhancement of the 

modulation efficiency at resonance due to mechanical amplification of the strain induced in the 

CoFeB. 28 ,29 ,30 The peak phase modulation index measured at resonance in preliminary experiments is 

b = 35±6.5 de g for A p = 0.4 V, corresponding to g = 8 7.5±1 6 deg/V. This is a quite high value allowing 

to implement a very efficient phase modulation (see discussion below), although it falls short of the 

ideal expectation . In a perfectly linear system the resonant enhancement of the aME and γ relative to 

the low -frequency value should scale with the mechanical Q -factor of the resonance. Assuming as 

low -frequency value g = 18 deg/V, arising from the 45 deg/V measured at 2 Hz on the device used 

for Fig . 3 and operated in the linear regime (V DC =10 V) rescaled by a factor 30/12 to take into account 

the reduction of the distance d between the antennas, together with the experimental value Q = 31 ,

the expected g should be 54 0 deg/V. The device’s deviation from perfect linearity near V DC = 5 V, 

together with mechanical coupling to a nearby second bridge (Fig. 1a) forming a pair of coupled 

oscillators, may account for this discrepancy . However, we point out that the corresponding converse 

magnetoelectric coefficient measured at resonance is on the order of 6 mT/V, higher than maximum 

values reported in laminate d composites. 28 

> Discussion

Our results demonstrate that magnetoelastic coupling in a strain -engineered MEMS platform enables 

efficient electrical control of spin -wave propagation for RF signal processing. The device operates 

either with an external magnetic field - extending the available frequency tuning range - or in a 

standalone mode that exploits growth -induced transverse anisotropy to set a remanent single -domain 9

configuration. Reliable operation was demonstrated in the standalone mode for spurious external 

fields < 1.5 mT, but further robustness can be achieved by increasing uniaxial anisotropy or 

introducing auxiliary biasing mechanisms such as exchange bias. Noteworthy, this mode allows 

compact integration (the device footprint is 20 00x 600 μm and could be further reduced in optimized 

designs) and no need of external biasing magnets. Furthermore, both voltage -controlled RF switching 

(≈50 dB attenuation) and high -efficiency phase -shifter operation (large phase -modulation 

coefficient s) can be implemented. 

We demonstrate highly efficient phase modulation in both static and dynamic regimes. In static 

operation we measured a phase -modulation coefficient up to ≈ 60 deg/V, with ±10% variability 

depending on the piezo pooling procedure. Dynamically, the modulatio n efficiency increases 

markedly near the fundamental bending resonance (1 7 kHz), with the phase -modulation coefficient 

tracking the mechanical response and reaching γ = 8 7.5 ± 1 6 deg/V at resonance . Although below the 

ideal theoretical maximum, this γ enab les a full 2π phase swing of a 7 GHz carrier with only ≈2.2 V 

drive , well within CMOS voltage levels. Operating the device fully in the linear regime and reducing 

the coupling to adjacent MEMS would allow to reach the theoretical amplif ication γ by the 

mechanical Q -factor. Extrapolating from our low -frequency γ (measured at 2 Hz, Fig. 4a), a 2π phase 

modulation at resonance could be achieved with a drive amplitude as small as 1 30 mV. 

Beyond the fundamental bending mode, additional mechanical resonances provide further degrees of 

freedom. Figures 4 c–e illustrate s the case of the second torsional mode at ~84 kHz . In the present 

symmetric actuation scheme, this mode is only weakly excited through hybridization, since it is 

antisymmetric with respect to 𝑦 while the piezo actuation is symmetric. However, i ndependent 

addressing of the four piezo pads would enable an efficient excitation. In this case, the dominant 

strain component is 𝜀 () , producing a longitudinal magnetoelastic field component 𝐻 #$ ,(. For a 

transverse equilibrium magnetization this induces a small tilt of the magnetization toward 𝑥 , but e ven 

modest canting suffices to yeld sizable phase modulation of propagating waves. Note that H ME flips 

sign with the sign of ε xy , but the resulting change in band dispersion is insensitive to the tilt direction 

(left or right) relative to the wavevector; hence the phase modulation appears at twice the mechanical 

drive frequency (≈168 kHz). This example highlights how mode symmetry and targeted strain 

engineering can be used to tailor the spatial profile and temporal response of the magnetoelastic field. 

A key advantage of our approach over conventional tuning based on magnetic fields is low power 

consumption. In static operation, once the bridge is displaced, power is limited to piezo leakage 

currents (<1 nA), corresponding to intrinsic nanowatt dissipation . Under resonant dynamic actuation 

(400 mV at 17.2 kHz), the dissipated power can be calculated assuming the typical tan d of PZT (on 

the order of 10 -2) and using the formula for a dielectric with losses .36 ,37 For t he measured device 10 

capacitance of 2. 4 nF, this leads to an intrinsic power dissipation of about 200 nW that would become 

≈ 6 μW in case of a 2.2 V drive ampli tude ensuring 2 p modulation . Achieving a 2 p phase modulat ion 

by uniform magnetic -field modulation would require an AC field amplitude of about 6 mT (see Figure 

3e) . The corresponding power dissipation of an electromagnet or an integrated coil providing that 

field would be orders of magnitude higher . In the assumption of placing a 400 μm long, 60 μm wide ,

1 μm thick copper current line beneath the magnonic conduit , producing a magnetic field of 6 mT 

would require 600 mA of current and local dissipation of ≈40 mW by thermal dissipation alone .

Finally note that t he proposed architecture is best suited to implement tunable and rel atively “slow” 

analog RF functions , such as phase shifting, adaptive filtering, switching and phase modulation ,

crucial, for instance, in the implementation of phase -arrays for RF antennas and Frequency -

Modulated Continuous -Wave Radars .38 ,39 Its application in high -speed digital modulation , requiring 

simultaneous amplitude and phase control at nanosecond timescales , is prevented by the “slow” 

mechanical response of piezo -MEMS (switching times of tens –hundreds of microseconds ).

Nevertheless, conventional RF MEMS are widely used in microwave electronics alongside 

monolithic microwave integrated circuits (e.g., GaAs and CMOS switches), particularly for 

applications demanding low loss and continuous (non -digital) RF modulation. 40 ,41 Although this 

paper presents a proof‑of‑concept device that is not yet optimized across all RF‑component metrics, 

it demonstrates the practical potential of exploiting the broad, easily tunable response of spin waves 

in realistic RF components. 

> Conclusions

In this paper we demonstrated an efficient, integrated approach for the modulation of RF signals 

carried by spin waves through magnetoelastic coupling in a strain -engineered MEMS platform. The 

usage of a CoFeB waveguide integrated on a suspended piezoelectric bridge enables large 

magnetoelectric coefficient of ~1 mT/V . At 7 GHz, this produces a phase shift up to ~ 730 deg for 14 

V applied, with a phase modulation coefficient of 62 deg/V in the linear regime . For higher voltages, 

transmission is suppressed by ~50 dB due to both the large shift of the frequency band and the micro 

magnetic reco nfiguration, enabling the same device to operate also as a voltage -controlled RF switch. 

Exploiting the mechanical resonance of the MEMS we demonstrate the po ssibility of reaching a 2 p

phase modulation of a 7 GHz carrier signal with just 2.2 V drive amplitude and power -consumption 

of a few μW. Higher efficiency could be obtained in optimized devices, fully exploiting the maximum 

theoretical amplification of the phase modulation efficiency by the Q -factor of the mechanical 

resonance. Our monolithic piezo -magnonic architecture combines large phase /amplitude tunability 

and low dynamic power consumption in a compact platform, highlighting the potential of hybrid 

piezo - magnonics for reconfigurable, low -power RF signal processing .11 

Methods 

Device fabrication Device fabrication was performed on the piezoelectric MEMS bridges kindly 

provided by STMicroelectronics. The magnonic waveguide was first patterned on the suspended 

bridge by optical lithography , followed by magnetron sputtering under an in -plane magnetic field of 

27 mT and lift -off, using a Ta(5 nm)/CoFeB(40 nm)/Ta(5 nm) trilayer stack. Subsequently , a 500 -nm -

thick SiO₂ layer was deposited by sputtering to electrically isolate the waveguide from the RF 

antennas used for Oersted -field excitation and to passivate the exposed metallic contacts of the 

piezoelectric MEMS . During this step, the MEMS contact pads were kept exposed using a lift -off -

defined mask. Finally, RF excitation antennas were fabricated by optical lithography, electron -beam 

evaporation, and lift -off of a Ti(10 nm)/ Au( 100 nm ) bilayer. 

Simulations and modelling Mechanical and electrical simulations of the MEMS were performed 

using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.3 to determine the device deformation under the application of a 

voltage and the resulting strain distribution. These simulations were used to identify the spatial 

regions of maximum strain and thus guide the placement of the magnetostrictive element. COMSOL 

was also employed to compute the eigenfrequencies of the structure and to identify its mechanical 

resonance modes. Micromagnetic simulations were carried out us ing Ubermag with the OOMMF 

solver to determine the equilibrium magnetization state of the magnonic conduit under the strain field 

simulated by COMSOL. 

MEMS characterization The MEMS electro -mechanical response was acquired using a HF2LI Lock -

in amplifier together with its transimpedance amplifier (HF2TIA). The lock -in was used to apply a 

voltage to either the top or bottom electrode of the device while the other electrode was connected to 

the virtual ground node of the HF2TIA. The frequency of the applied voltage was swept to reconstruct 

the electromechanical response of the device at resonance and estimate its quality factor. For each 

frequency, t he current produced by the capacitance and the displacement of the piezoelectric actuat ors 

was converted into a voltage by the HF2TIA and sent to the lock -in amplifier that reconstructed the 

frequency response of the device impedance. After subtracting the capacitive contribution to the 

detected signal, t he data was fitted using the analytical response of a damped harmonic oscillator. The 

key features of the mechanical resonator derived from electric measurements were further confirmed 

us ing a Digital Holographic Microscope from Lyncetec. 

Broadband spectroscopy Broadband spin -wave spectroscopy was performed using a RF probe station 

equipped with a quadrupolar vector electromagnet providing in -plane magnetic fields up to 200 mT, 

and a four -port vector network analyzer with a bandwidth up to 43 GHz (R&S ZNA43). 

Mea surements were carried out using either frequency -swept or time -sweep acquisition modes. In12 

frequency -swept measurements, the excitation frequency was swept from 4 MHz to 40 GHz using 

10,000 points, resulting in a harmonic frequency grid [δf,2 δf,3 δf,…,N δf] with δf=4 MHz. This 

uniform spacing enables time -gating procedures . The applied RF power was 0 dBm, and the full 

scattering matrix was recorded. For experiments investigating strain -induced effects (Fig. 2a –f), a 

predefined measurement protocol was adopted to minimize hysteresis -related artifacts. The MEMS 

piezoelectric actuator was first polari zed by applying a high voltage, after which the voltage was 

reduced to the lowest value of the investigated range. The voltage was supplied using a Keithley 2450 

source meter. For each voltage value, measurements were performed by sweeping the magnetic fie ld 

from the lowest to the highest value and acquiring the scattering matrix over the harmonic frequency 

grid. Only after completing the full magnetic -field sweep was the voltage increased to the next value. 

This procedure ensures that all measurements perf ormed at a given voltage correspond to an identical 

mechanical state of the MEMS, thereby suppressing effects arising from mechanical hysteresis. 

Measurements targeting the dynamic modulation of spin -wave propagation were conducted using a 

modified electrical configuration for the MEMS actuation . In this case, the MEMS bottom electrode 

was connected either to ground or, during resonance measurements (such as the black trace in Fig. 

4c), to the input of the lock -in amplifier as described in the previous para graph , while the top electrode 

was connected to the output of a voltage amplifier driven by the lock -in amplifier. This configuration 

enables the application of a DC bias voltage with a superimposed AC modulation at a selected 

frequency. The spin -wave response was recorded in time -sweep mode, i.e. by measuring the 

scattering matrix at a fixed frequency as a function of time. Provided that the sampling rate fulfils the 

Nyquist criterion for the applied modulation frequency, this approach allows direct tracking of the 

time -dependent modulation of the spin -wave signal induced by the dynamically varying strain. 

Static and dynamic MOKE measurements Static magneto -optical Kerr effect (MOKE) 

measurements were performed using a home -built microMOKE setup using an optical microscope 

operated in the longitudinal configuration. Illumination was provided by white p -polarized light, and 

the reflected beam was analyzed using an s -oriented polarizer to isolate the Kerr rotation signal before 

detection with a high -sensitivity, high -resolutio n charge -coupled device camera. The images were 

acquired using a 50 x objective, allowi ng the capture of areas of approximately 150 by 400 

micrometers with a spatial resolution of about 500 nm. Stroboscopic images of the magnetization 

dynamics upon excitation of SWs have been recorded using a Tr -MOKE (Time -Resolved Magneto -

Optical Kerr Effect) apparatus exploiting a train of polarized laser pulses (638 nm, pulse -width of 70 

ps) which strik e the magnetized surfac e and undergo a polarization rotation, proportional to the 

oscillating out -of -plane (OOP) magnetization component. The frequency of the spin wave and the 

repetition rate of the laser pulse train are linked by an integer ratio, so that each laser pulse probes the 13 

wavefront always at the same phase of the oscillation. In this way, the system works like a 

stroboscope, "freezing" the ultrafast motion of the wave at a precise instant in its cycle. 2D maps are 

obtained by scanning the sample with a piezo -actuator under the laser beam, which is focused into a 

spot with a diameter smaller than 1 micron .14 

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge funds from the European Union via the Horizon Europe project “MandMEMS”, 

grant 101070536 and from NextGenerationEU, PNRR MUR – M4C2 – Investimento 3.1, project IR_0000015 

– “Nano Foundries and Fine Analysis – Digital Infrastructure (NFFA –DI)”, CUP B53C22004310006. We 

thank : D. Ferling, from Nokia -Nell -Labs for fruitful discussions on the potential of our devices as RF 

components ; P. Pirro for general discussions on the applications of our platform; M. Vitali for technical support 

in MOKE experiments; L. Castoldi and S. Zerbini from STMicroelectronics for providing MEMS devices. In 

the framework of the JRP STEAM. This work has been partially performed at Polifab, the micro and 

nanofabrication facility of Politecnico di Milano. 

Author contribution 

Maria Cocconcelli initially proposed the concept of the hybrid device. M.C and A. A. mainly contributed to 

device fabrication, characterization and data analysis. N. P. performed the static micro -MOKE 

characterization. P.F. carried out the TR -MOKE analysis . F.M. performed the characterization of the MEMS 

mechanical resonance. R.B wrote the manuscript with the collaboration of all the authors. F.M and R.B 

supervised the research. 15 

Figure 1: a) Top view of two piezo -bridges (scale -bar 200 μm) . b) zoom of the central part of a single bridge 

(scale -bar 50 μm) with the CoFeB waveguide (red) and meander antennas. c) Vertical displacement of the 

bridge vs. voltage V p applied to the piezo. d) Sketch of the bended CoFeB conduit with consistent orientations 

of the fields. e) DE band dispersions of SW for the unstrained (V p=0V – blue continuous line ) and strained 

(V p=10 V - red continuous line) condition , together with the antenna excitation efficiency (dashed line). Df0

and Df10 represent the bandwidth of SW corresponding to the first peak of the excitation efficiency of the 

antenna for 0 and 10 V. k 0 and k 10 are the corresponding wave -vectors excited at 7 GHz. f) Color map of the 

strain field generated by V p=10 V. g) Corresponding configuration of the magnetization in the CoFeB conduit 

for zero external field (remanence). h) Color map of the calculated magnetoelastic field H ME for V p=10 V. 16 

Figure 2 : a) Colour map of the reference subtracted imaginary part of the scattering coefficient S21 from VNA 

experiments, as a function of frequency and externa l magnetic field, for V p=0 V. b) Continuous lines: linecuts 

of the plot in Fig. 2a, corresponding to the vertical lines in panel a, for specific values of the external field H e.

Dashed lines: spectra taken at fixed H e=25 mT and variable V p (values within brackets) allowing to reproduce 

the continuous lines, i.e. to obtain the same effective field because of the creation of a negative magnetoelastic 

field. 17 

Figure 3 : a) Colour plot of the reference subtracted imaginary part of S 21 vs. frequency and applied voltage at 

fixed H e=25 mT. b) Same as in a, but for zero external magnetic field. c) Linecuts of pane l 3b for selected 

values of V p between 0 and 20 V in steps of 4 V. d) Phase of S 21 vs frequency for V p in the 0 -16 V range where 

the phase at 7 GHz is well defined. e) Relative phase shift induced by V p at 7 GHz. f) Operational diagram of 

the device, showing for each value of V p between 0 and 20 V the corresponding amplitude and phase 

modulation. The light -blue and light -pink areas correspond, respectively, to the “phase shifter” and “RF 

switch” operation modes. g,h,i) Static MOKE images of the region of the CoFeB waveguide with antennas at 

zero H e and V p = 0, 20, 30 V. l) TRMOKE image of the dynamic part of the local magnetization m z showing 

SW wavefronts generated by the left antenna at 7 GHz for V p= 6 V. m) Linecuts of m z maps along the center 

of the waveguide for different values of V p. n) Plot of the experimental values of the SW wavelength ( l) vs. 

Vp extracted from data in panel m.18 

Figure 4 : a) Real -time evolution of the phase of S 21 at 7GHz, for H e=0mT and different amplitudes of an AC 

signal at 2 Hz applied to the piezo. b) Blue dots: phase modulation coefficient b vs. the modulation frequency 

of the AC signal applied to the piezo. Continuous line: mechanical resonance curve . In the insert the spatial 

profile of the first bending mode corresponding to the observed resonance. c) Spatial profile of the second 

torsional mode that could be efficiently excited at about 84 kHz for an asymmetric application of voltages to 

the four piezoelectric elements , as shown in the inset. d) Color maps of the strain field produced by this mode ,

for Vp=10V . e) Corresponding maps of the magnetoelectric field produced. 

a           

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> 5.0
> Time (s)
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> -200
> -100
> 0
> -100
> 200
> F(deg )
> AC voltage (V)
> 010 20 30 40 50
> fM(kHz)
> 0
> 30
> 10
> 20
> 40
> β( fM) (deg)

b

> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -7·10 -3
> 7·10 -3εxx
> -7·10 -3
> 7·10 -3εyy
> -7·10 -3
> 7·10 -3εzz
> -7·10 -3
> 7·10 -3εxy

d        

> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -10
> 10
> y
> (μm)
> -20 mT
> 20 mT
> HME,x
> -20 mT
> 20 mT HME,y
> -100 -50 050 100
> x ( μm)
> e)
> -Vp+Vp

c19 

REFERENCES 

1. Akyildiz, I. F., Kak, A. & Nie, S. 6G and Beyond: The Future of Wireless Communications Systems. 

IEEE Access 8, 133995 –134030 (2020). 

2. Wang, B., Li, J., Wu, T. & Qu, C. A review of the development and application of RF technology 

and its sub -technologies. ACE 79 , 1 –10 (2024). 

3. Rosen, A., Stuchly, M. A. & Vander Vorst, A. Applications of RF/microwaves in medicine. IEEE 

Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 50 , 963 –974 (2002). 

4. Flebus, B. et al. The 2024 magnonics roadmap. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 36 , 363501 (2024). 

5. Wang, Q., Csaba, G., Verba, R., Chumak, A. V. & Pirro, P. Nanoscale magnonic networks. Phys. 

Rev. Applied 21 , 040503 (2024). 

6. Levchenko, K. O., Davídková, K., Mikkelsen, J. & Chumak, A. V. Review on spin -wave RF 

applications. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2411.19212 (2024). 

7. Davídková, K. et al. Nanoscale spin -wave frequency -selective limiter for 5G technology. Phys. Rev. 

Applied 23 , 034026 (2025). 

8. Szulc, K., Graczyk, P., Mruczkiewicz, M., Gubbiotti, G. & Krawczyk, M. Spin -Wave Diode and 

Circulator Based on Unidirectional Coupling. Phys. Rev. Applied 14 , 034063 (2020). 

9. Pirro, P., Vasyuchka, V. I., Serga, A. A. & Hillebrands, B. Advances in coherent magnonics. Nat Rev 

Mater 6, 1114 –1135 (2021). 

10. Wang, Q. et al. A magnonic directional coupler for integrated magnonic half -adders. Nat Electron 3,

765 –774 (2020). 

11. Papp, Á., Porod, W. & Csaba, G. Nanoscale neural network using non -linear spin -wave interference. 

Nat Commun 12 , 6422 (2021). 

12. Nakane, R., Tanaka, G. & Hirose, A. Reservoir Computing With Spin Waves Excited in a Garnet 

Film. IEEE Access 6, 4462 –4469 (2018). 

13. Watt, S. & Kostylev, M. Reservoir Computing Using a Spin -Wave Delay -Line Active -Ring 

Resonator Based on Yttrium -Iron -Garnet Film. Phys. Rev. Applied 13 , 034057 (2020). 

14. Albisetti, E. et al. Optically Inspired Nanomagnonics with Nonreciprocal Spin Waves in Synthetic 

Antiferromagnets. Adv. Mater. 32 , 1906439 (2020). 

15. Devitt, C., Tiwari, S., Zivasatienraj, B. & Bhave, S. A. Spin -wave band -pass filters for 6G 

communication. Nature 650 , 599 –605 (2026). 

16. Cocconcelli, M. et al. Tuning magnonic devices with on -chip permanent micromagnets. Phys. Rev. 

Applied 22 , 064063 (2024). 

17. Cocconcelli, M. et al. Standalone Integrated Magnonic Devices. Advanced Materials 37 , 2503493 

(2025). 

18. Bandyopadhyay, S. Perspective: There is plenty of room for magnetic straintronics in the analog 

domain. npj Spintronics 2, 15 (2024). 

19. Lee, E. W. Magnetostriction and Magnetomechanical Effects. Rep. Prog. Phys. 18 , 184 –229 (1955). 

20. Chotorlishvili, L. et al. Magnonic Magnetoelectric Coupling in Ferroelectric/Ferromagnetic 

Composites. Physica Status Solidi (b) 257 , 1900750 (2020). 

21. Pradhan, D. K., Kumari, S. & Rack, P. D. Magnetoelectric Composites: Applications, Coupling 

Mechanisms, and Future Directions. Nanomaterials 10 , 2072 (2020). 

22. Sadovnikov, A. V. et al. Magnon Straintronics: Reconfigurable Spin -Wave Routing in Strain -

Controlled Bilateral Magnetic Stripes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 , 257203 (2018). 

23. Narducci, D. et al. Magnetoelectric coupling in Ba:Pb(Zr,Ti)O3/Co40Fe40B20 nanoscale 

waveguides studied by propagating spin -wave spectroscopy. Applied Physics Letters 124 , 182408 (2024). 

24. Ghisi, A., Boni, N., Carminati, R. & Mariani, S. A Piezo -MEMS Device for Fatigue Testing of Thin 

Metal Layers. in The 1st International Conference on Micromachines and Applications 17 (MDPI, 2021). 

doi:10.3390/Micromachines2021 -09559. 

25. Gueye, M. et al. Spectroscopic investigation of elastic and magnetoelastic properties of CoFeB thin 

films. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 49 , 145003 (2016). 

26. Vanderveken, F. et al. Confined magnetoelastic waves in thin waveguides. Phys. Rev. B 103 , 054439 

(2021). 

27. Kalinikos, B. A. & Slavin, A. N. Theory of dipole -exchange spin wave spectrum for ferromagnetic 

films with mixed exchange boundary conditions. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 19 , 7013 –7033 (1986). 

28. Zhang, S. -H., Zhou, J. -P., Shi, Z., Liu, P. & Deng, C. -Y. Enhancing magnetic field sensitivity and 20 

giant converse magnetoelectric effect in laminate composite of Terfenol -D and multilayer piezoelectric 

vibrator. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 590 , 46 –49 (2014). 

29. Wang, Y. et al. Giant sharp converse magnetoelectric effect from the combination of a piezoelectric 

transformer with a piezoelectric/magnetostrictive laminated composite. Applied Physics Letters 93 , 113503 

(2008). 

30. Liu, Y. et al. Converse magneto -electric effects in a core –shell multiferroic nanofiber by electric 

field tuning of ferromagnetic resonance. Sci Rep 10 , 20170 (2020). 

31. Lebedev, G. A. et al. Converse magnetoelectric effect dependence with CoFeB composition in 

ferromagnetic/piezoelectric composites. Journal of Applied Physics 111 , 07C725 (2012). 

32. Radaelli, G. et al. Electric control of magnetism at the Fe/BaTiO3 interface. Nat Commun 5, 3404 

(2014). 

33. Nan, T. et al. Quantification of strain and charge co -mediated magnetoelectric coupling on ultra -thin 

Permalloy/PMN -PT interface. Sci Rep 4, 3688 (2014). 

34. Zhao, S. et al. Ionic Liquid Gating Control of Spin Reorientation Transition and Switching of 

Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy. Advanced Materials 30 , 1801639 (2018). 

35. Miura, K. et al. Voltage -induced magnetization dynamics in CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB magnetic tunnel 

junctions. Sci Rep 7, 42511 (2017). 

36. Chen, H. D., Udayakumar, K. R., Cross, L. E., Bernstein, J. J. & Niles, L. C. Dielectric, ferroelectric, 

and piezoelectric properties of lead zirconate titanate thick films on silicon substrates. Journal of Applied 

Physics 77 , 3349 –3353 (1995). 

37. Yu, S., Li, L., Zhang, W., Sun, Z. & Dong, H. Multilayer thin films with compositional 

PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/Bi1.5Zn1.0Nb1.5O7 layers for tunable applications. Sci Rep 5, 10173 (2015). 

38. Armenta, C. J. A., Porter, S. & Marvin, A. Reconfigurable phased array antennas with RF -MEMS on 

a PCB substrate. in 2012 Loughborough Antennas & Propagation Conference (LAPC) 1–5 (IEEE, 

Loughborough, Leicestershire, United Kingdom, 2012). doi:10.1109/LAPC.2012.6402973. 

39. Sayed, A. N., Ramahi, O. M. & Shaker, G. Frequency -Modulated Continuous -Wave Radar 

Perspectives on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Detection and Classification: A Primer for Researchers with 

Comprehensive Machine Learning Review and Emphasis on Full -Wave Electrom agnetic Computer -Aided 

Design Tools. Drones 8, 370 (2024). 

40. Rebeiz, G. M., Guan -Leng Tan & Hayden, J. S. RF MEMS phase shifters: design and applications. 

IEEE Microwave 3, 72 –81 (2002). 

41. Kebe, M., Yagoub, M. C. E. & Amaya, R. E. A Survey of Phase Shifters for Microwave Phased 

Array Systems. Circuit Theory & Apps 53 , 3719 –3739 (2025).