Title: MetaTune: Adjoint-based Meta-tuning via Robotic Differentiable Dynamics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27313v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:52:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# MetaTune: Adjoint-based Meta-tuning via Robotic Differentiable Dynamics 

Xiexin Peng 1, Bingheng Wang 2, Tao Zhang 1, Ying Zheng 1,3,вҲ—

1School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 

2 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117583, Singapore 

3The Shenzhen Huazhong University of Science and Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China Email: zyhidy@mail.hust.edu.cn 

Abstract вҖ”Disturbance observer-based control has shown promise in robustifying robotic systems against uncertainties. However, tuning such systems remains challenging due to the strong coupling between controller gains and observer param-eters. In this work, we propose MetaTune, a unified frame-work for joint auto-tuning of feedback controllers and distur-bance observers through differentiable closed-loop meta-learning. MetaTune integrates a portable neural policy with physics-informed gradients derived from differentiable system dynamics, enabling adaptive gain across tasks and operating conditions. We develop an adjoint method that efficiently computes the meta-gradients with respect to adaptive gains backward in time to directly minimize the cost-to-go. Compared to existing forward methods, our approach reduces the computational complexity to be linear in the data horizon. Experimental results on quadrotor control show that MetaTune, achieves consistent improvements over state-of-the-art differentiable tuning methods while reducing gradient computation time by more than 50%. In high-fidelity PX4-Gazebo hardware-in-the-loop simulation, the learned adap-tive policy yields 15вҖ“20% average tracking error reduction at aggressive flight speeds and up to 40% improvement under strong disturbances, while demonstrating zero-shot sim-to-sim transfer without fine-tuning. 

Index Terms вҖ”Meta-learning, Automatic tuning, Robust con-trol, Physics-informed Learning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

As robotic systems extend beyond structured environments into complex and uncertain real-world settings, control design faces fundamentally new challenges. Applications such as offshore UAV inspection and rough-terrain locomotion de-mand robustness against stochastic disturbances and modeling uncertainties. To meet these demands, integrating feedback controllers with disturbance observers has become a widely adopted strategy in robust control design. This paradigm builds upon established estimation frameworks, extending from the classical Kalman filter [1] and Luenberger observers [2] to robust architectures including disturbance observers (DOBs), extended state observers (ESOs), and sliding-mode observers (SMOs) [3]вҖ“[6]. 

*This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62503188, in part by the Hubei Province International Science and Technology Cooperation Project under Grant 2024EHA033, and in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2025A1515010134. Optimizer            

> Rollout
> Reference
> Gen
> Embedded Control & Observation
> Physical Plant
> Controller
> Observer
> uЛҶx
> u
> x
> META -POLICY
> Оё
> ПҲ
> Trajectory
> Buffer
> ekxref пҒ»пҒ»
> ЛҶ,,x x u
> Chain Rule
> Engine
> Adjoint
> Sensitivity Solver
> Loss
> Calculation
> Input Output dL
> d
> пҒёпҒЁпҒё
> пҒ„пҒ»( , )
> пҒұ пҒ№
> пҒё
> пҒ»
> пҒ»ЛҶ( , )
> L
> x x
> пҒ»
> пҒ»ЛҶ( , )
> ( , )
> x x
> пҒұ пҒ№
> пҒ»
> пҒ»

Fig. 1. Adjoint-based meta-learning framework for end-to-end tuning of controllerвҖ“observer parameters. Gradients of a task-level loss are propagated backward through the closed-loop system dynamics via adjoint sensitivity analysis and subsequently transformed into meta-policy gradients using the chain rule, enabling automatic gain adaptation. 

Observer-based control architectures critically depend on coordination between control and estimation parameters for nonlinear systems. Control strategies based on static assump-tions or fixed parameters are inherently limited when con-fronted with time-varying, nonlinear disturbances that are chal-lenging to model explicitly [7]. To address this issue, variable-gain strategies such as gain scheduling, LQR-based tuning [8], and fuzzy control [9] have been explored. However, these ap-proaches typically rely on offline-designed rules and lack true online adaptability under uncertainty. Adaptive control offers a principled alternative by adjusting controller and observer gains based on real-time system behavior. Classical MRAC ensures reference tracking with Lyapunov stability guarantees [10], and similar ideas have been extended to observer-based architectures for disturbance compensation [11]. Despite extending the applicability of fixed-gain structures, these methods fundamentally depend on predefined operating conditions or expert-designed adaptive laws, limiting their ability to generalize under unknown disturbances and evolving environments. This limitation has motivated learning-based ap-proaches that leverage data-driven representations to enhance robustness beyond model-based adaptive control assumptions. Recent learning-based approaches for robust control can be broadly categorized into two distinct groups based on their intervention mechanisms. The first category focuses on 

> arXiv:2603.27313v1 [cs.RO] 28 Mar 2026

disturbance-aware learning. Representative works explicitly estimate external disturbances or unmodeled dynamics for compensation in the control loop [12]вҖ“[16], while other ap-proaches implicitly account for disturbance effects by updating control policies directly based on closed-loop performance metrics [17]. The second category concentrates on intelli-gent parameter adaptation, where learning algorithms adjust controller or observer gains online to improve closed-loop performance. Reinforcement learning methods formulate gain tuning as a reward maximization problem [18], [19]. Meta-learning approaches exploit shared structure across tasks to enable rapid adaptation and improved generalization [20]. More recently, the integration of differentiable physics has formalized parameter tuning as a gradient-based optimization problem. By modeling system dynamics as differentiable computational graphs, frameworks such as DiffTune [21] and Neural MHE [22] propagate analytical gradients of task-level losses directly through the control loop, which facilitates end-to-end optimization of controller or estimator parameters using trajectory data, thereby effectively mitigating the sample inefficiencies associated with black-box search methods. However, existing methodologies face a fundamental limi-tation in terms of the interplay between control and estimation during the learning and adaptation process. First, disturbance-aware approaches primarily emphasize the explicit compen-sation of external forces, often overlooking the optimization of the feedback controller itself. Even when augmented with robust mechanisms such as L1 adaptive control [23], these methods remain constrained by manually designed reference models or fixed filter bandwidths, which restrict their adapt-ability to dynamic variations. Second, while parameter adap-tation strategies efficiently address gain tuning, they typically treat control and estimation as isolated processes. This decou-pled perspective fails to acknowledge the intrinsic coupling in disturbance-observer-based architectures. Consequently, such isolated tuning schemes fail to balance the trade-off between disturbance rejection and noise sensitivity, potentially leading to sub-optimal or even unstable closed-loop behavior. In this work, we propose MetaTune, a unified framework that achieves joint tuning of feedback control and distur-bance estimation by formulating the tuning problem as a differentiable optimization over closed-loop executions. As shown in Fig. 1, MetaTune integrates a portable neural net-work with differentiable control and observation modules to generate adaptive gains across tasks. To enable efficient and scalable learning, we compute meta-gradients by solving adjoint dynamics backward in time, which yields vector-valued gradient trajectories. Compared with DiffTune [21], which relies on forward sensitivity propagation, the proposed adjoint-based approach computes trajectory-level gradients in a single backward sweep. As a result, the gradient computation complexity scales linearly with the horizon length, rather than quadratically, and remains independent of the parameter dimension. This property is particularly advantageous when observer dynamics are incorporated into the tuning process, where the augmented state and gain dimensions substantially amplify the computational cost of forward sensitivity methods. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:  

> вҖў

Unified Joint Tuning. A unified architecture is proposed that embeds differentiable system dynamics into the learning policy, enabling end-to-end joint optimization of control and estimation for robust adaptation.  

> вҖў

Scalable Adjoint-based Method. An adjoint-based meta-gradient method for joint tuning is derived, achieving parameter-dimensionвҖ“independent computa-tional complexity and scalability to high-dimensional gain parameterizations.  

> вҖў

Robust Generalization. MetaTune is validated on robust quadrotor flight control in high-fidelity simulation. A portable policy parameterized by a single-hidden-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) is employed for gain adap-tation. The proposed framework demonstrates robust gen-eralization across unseen trajectories and disturbances. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the problem setting. Section III presents the proposed adjoint-based meta-gradient computation framework. Section IV presents experimental evaluation of the proposed method on a quadrotor platform. Section V discusses the implications and limitations of the approach and concludes the paper. II. P ROBLEM STATEMENT 

Consider a discrete-time nonlinear dynamical system oper-ating in a complex environment subject to generalized distur-bances. The evolution of the system state is governed by the open-loop dynamics: 

xk+1 = f (xk, u k) + dk (1) where x вҲҲ Rn represents the system state, u вҲҲ Rm is the control input, d вҲҲ Rn denotes the generalized disturbance vector, and k signifies the time step. The function f : Rn Г—

Rm вҶ’ Rn represents the nominal model of the system. 

Remark 1. The term dk represents a generalized abstraction of system uncertainties. It aggregates the effects of exter-nal perturbations and modeling inaccuracies resulting from discrepancies between the actual system dynamics and the nominal model. Importantly, the disturbance sequence {dk} is unknown and unstructured: it is neither directly measurable nor subject to optimization. The influence of disturbances within systems must be mitigated to achieve satisfactory control performance. To offset the influences of disturbances within systems, observer-based control methods are commonly employed. The system state is partially accessible through the measurement equation yk = g(xk), where yk вҲҲ Rp denotes the mea-sured output corrupted by sensor noise. To simultaneously reconstruct the system state and compensate for the lumped disturbance, the disturbance observer is constructed with an augmented state representation as follows: 

ЛҶxk+1 = o(ЛҶ xk, u k, y k+1 ; ПҲk), (2) where we denote the augmented observer state as ЛҶxk =[ЛҶ x sys  

> k

, ЛҶdk]вҠӨ, which comprises both the estimated system state and disturbance. Moreover, ПҲk вҲҲ RnПҲ represents the time-varying observer parameters. In observer-based control methods, the controlinput is cal-culated using the estimatedstate through a parameterized feed-back law tracking a reference trajectory xdk:

uk = h(ЛҶ xk, x dk; Оёk), (3) where Оёk вҲҲ RnОё denotes the time-varying controller gains. We assume that f, g, o , and h are strictly differentiable with respect to their state and parameter arguments. With the system architecture in place, we reformulate the parameter adaptation process as a differentiable trajectory optimization problem. Instead of treating the parameters as static constants determined through offline tuning or isolated stability analyses, the sequences {Оёk} and {ПҲk} are regarded as decision variables that influence the closed-loop evolution over a finite horizon. The goal is to minimize a cumulative cost 

J subject to the explicit constraints induced by the coupled feedback and estimation dynamics. Mathematically, the joint tuning task can be cast into the following constrained nonlinear optimization form: minimize    

> {Оёk,ПҲ k}NвҲ’1
> k=0

J = 

> NвҲ’1

X

> k=0

в„“(ЛҶ xk, x k, u k)

subject to xk+1 = f (xk, u k) + dk,yk+1 = g(xk+1 ),

ЛҶxk+1 = o(ЛҶ xk, u k, y k+1 ; ПҲk),uk = h(ЛҶ xk, x dk; Оёk),k вҲҲ { 0, 1, . . . , N вҲ’ 1},

(P) Additional constraints on the parameter sequences, such as bounds or regularization terms, can be incorporated into this formulation without altering the proposed framework. In linear time-invariant systems, estimator and controller designs can be decoupled without loss of optimality. In con-trast, Problem (P) considers a setting in which this separation principle does not apply, as the controller and observer are jointly tuned as components of a coupled closed-loop dynam-ical system. In this formulation, the controller operates on the observer output rather than the true state, so that the effective plant seen by the feedback law implicitly incorporates the estimator dynamics. As a result, control and estimation cannot be treated as independent design modules, and solving (P) re-quires identifying a coordinated solution in the joint parameter space that optimizes overall closed-loop performance. III. A DJOINT -BASED META -L EARNING FRAMEWORK 

This section presents an adjoint-based meta-learning frame-work that exploits differentiable closed-loop dynamics to compute gradients via adjoint equations, jointly optimizing controllers and observers through a unified policy that pro-duces task-dependent gains, enabling physics-informed end-to-end training without black-box methods. 

A. Control-oriented Meta Learning 

We adopt a control-oriented meta-learning perspective [17], treating time-varying controller and observer gains as policy outputs. Each task T is sampled from a distribution p(T )

characterizing environment and system variations. Distinct tasks induce unique closed-loop behaviors, necessitating task-specific parameter trajectories. Policy search methods address the limitations of traditional adaptive control by formulating adaptation as gradient-based optimization over parameterized policies, rather than heuristic single-task tuning. A policy ПҖ is evaluated by its expected closed-loop perfor-mance over the task distribution, 

J (ПҖ) = ET вҲј p(T )

"N вҲ’1X

> k=0

в„“  ПҖ(T i, k ), T i#

, (4) where ПҖ maps task features T i to adaptive parameters, en-abling task-specific tuning. 

B. Neural Parameterization of Adaptive Gains 

To navigate the complexity of task-dependent parameter tra-jectories, we adopt a meta-learning perspective by employing a neural network as the policy representation: 

О·k = ПҖОҫ (Tk), (5) where Оҫ denotes the neural network parameters and Tk rep-resents task features influencing system behavior. We assume 

Tk is measurable or provided by a higher-level planner and remains exogenous to the closed-loop dynamics. The latent output О·k is mapped to bounded gains Оҳk through element-wise scaling (e.g., sigmoid scaling) to satisfy predefined safety limits. The joint tuning problem is then formulated as finding the optimal neural network parameters ОҫвҲ— that minimize the closed-loop loss function defined in (4): 

min  

> Оҫ

J  ЛҶx(Оҫ), x(Оҫ), u(Оҫ)

s.t. Closed-loop dynamics driven by ПҖОҫ .

(6) Compared to fixed gain tuning, the policy flexibly adjusts controller and observer parameters for different task features 

Tk, enabling adaptation within a unified framework. To update the network parameters Оҫ, we combine the physics-informed meta-gradients derived in Sec. III-C with the networkвҖҷs local gradients. The gradient of the total loss with respect to the network weights is computed using the chain rule: 

вҲҮОҫ J (В·) = 1

M

> M

X 

> i=1
> NвҲ’1

X

> k=0

 вҲӮО· ik

вҲӮОҫ 

вҠӨ вҲӮв„“ i

вҲӮО· ik

. (7) where M denotes the number of tasks sampled from the distri-bution p(T ), and N is the finite rollout horizon length for each task. в„“вҲӮО· k is the sensitivity computed via the adjoint method, and вҲӮО· k 

> вҲӮОҫ

is the Jacobian of the neural network obtained via backpropagation. The parameters Оҫ are iteratively updated using a gradient-based optimizer (e.g. Adam) to minimize the closed-loop objective. Algorithm 1 MetaTune Training Loop  

> 1:

Input: Task dist. p(T ), initial params Оҫ, learning rate Оұ 

> 2:

Output: Optimized parameters ОҫвҲ— 

> 3:

while not converged do  

> 4:

Sample batch of tasks {T i}Bi=1 вҲј p(T ) 

> 5:

for t = 0 to Tepisode do в–· Forward Pass  

> 6:

Compute gains Оҳt via (5)  

> 7:

Apply control ut (3) and update observer (2)  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

for t = Tepisode to 0 do в–· Backward Pass  

> 10:

Update adjoints О»u,k , О» ЛҶx,k , О» x,k via (10)вҖ“(12)  

> 11:

Accumulate gradients вҲҮОҫ L via chain rule (7)  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Update Оҫ using optimizer  

> 14:

end while 

C. Gradient Computation 

In the coupled closed-loop dynamics of Problem (P), pa-rameter variations influence the entire rollout, rendering the trajectory-level objective inherently non-local. A direct ap-proach to compute gradients is forward sensitivity analysis. Writing the closed-loop dynamics compactly as xk+1 =

F(xk, Оҳk) with time-varying gains Оҳk = [Оёk, ПҲ k], the stateвҖ“parameter sensitivity Sk = вҲӮxk 

> вҲӮОҳ

evolves according to 

Sk+1 = вҲӮFk

вҲӮxk

Sk + вҲӮFk

вҲӮОҳk

. (8) Since each parameter block Оҳk affects all subsequent states and the associated cost-to-go, computing trajectory gradients requires repeated sensitivity propagation, resulting in quadratic complexity with respect to the horizon length, as illustrated in Fig. 2. To overcome these limitations, we adopt a backward sen-sitivity analysis based on discrete adjoint methods [24], [25]. The closed-loop system is represented as an augmented pro-cess encompassing both the plant and observer states. The control input uk treated as a lifted independent variable subject to the constraint imposed by the controller, leading to the discrete augmented Lagrangian over the trajectory: 

L = 

> NвҲ’1

X

> k=0



в„“(xk, ЛҶxk, u k)+ О»вҠӨ

> x,k +1

 f (xk, u k) вҲ’ xk+1 



+ О»вҠӨ

> ЛҶx,k +1

 o(ЛҶ xk, x k, u k; ПҲ) вҲ’ ЛҶxk+1 



+ О»вҠӨ

> u,k

 h(ЛҶ xk, x dk; Оё) вҲ’ uk



.

(9) where О»x,k and О»ЛҶx,k are adjoint variables associated with the plant and observer dynamics, respectively. Moreover О»u,k is the control channel adjoint. Taking the stationarity condition of the augmented La-grangian with respect to the control input, вҲҮuk L = 0 , yields the explicit expression for the control channel adjoint: 

О»u,k = вҲӮв„“ k

вҲӮu k

+

 вҲӮf вҲӮu k

вҠӨ

О»x,k +1 +

 вҲӮo вҲӮu k

вҠӨ

О»ЛҶx,k +1 (10) FORWARD METHOD                       

> BACKWARD METHOD
> (Оё1)вҖҰ(Оёk)вҖҰ(Оёm)вҖҰ[L]
> Perturb Оёk
> Perturb Оёm
> Forward Pass 1
> Forward Pass 2
> (Оё1)вҖҰ(Оёk)вҖҰ(Оёm)вҖҰ[L]
> Sample Value (dL/d Оёk)Sample Value (dL/d Оёm)
> Fig. 2. Computational efficiency comparison between forward and backward sensitivity analysis. (Top) The forward method requires a separate forward propagation rollout for each parameter perturbation to capture its effect on the final loss L, leading to expensive computations. (Bottom) The proposed back-ward method computes the cost-to-go function in a single backward sweep. Gradients for all parameters along the horizon are retrieved simultaneously, significantly reducing computational complexity from O(N2)to O(N).

The control channel adjoint О»u,k aggregates the marginal contribution of the control input through the immediate loss, the plant dynamics, and the observer update. Substituting (10) into the stationarity conditions with respect to ЛҶxk and xk yields the coupled adjoint recursions: 

О»ЛҶx,k = вҲӮв„“ k

вҲӮ ЛҶxk

+

 вҲӮo вҲӮ ЛҶxk

вҠӨ

О»ЛҶx,k +1 +

 вҲӮh вҲӮ ЛҶxk

вҠӨ

О»u,k (11) 

О»x,k = вҲӮв„“ k

вҲӮx k

+

 вҲӮf вҲӮx k

вҠӨ

О»x,k +1 +

 вҲӮo вҲӮx k

вҠӨ

О»ЛҶx,k +1 . (12) where the adjoint variables are propagated backward in time and initialized at the terminal step. In the absence of an explicit terminal cost, the terminal adjoint values are set to zero. These equations highlight the coupling: О»ЛҶx,k propagates through the observer and control policy, whereas О»x,k evolves through the plant and observer dynamics. The backward costate recursion encodes the cumulative cost-to-go effect into vector-valued adjoint variables, yielding a compact gradient representation without explicitly storing or propagating large Jacobians. Finally, since the tunable parameters Оҳ = {Оё, ПҲ } appear only in the explicit constraints defining the controller and observer, the parameter gradients are obtained by accumulating their contributions along the trajectory: 

вҲҮОё L = 

> NвҲ’1

X

> k=0

 вҲӮh вҲӮОё 

вҠӨ

О»u,k (13a) 

вҲҮПҲ L = 

> NвҲ’1

X

> k=0

 вҲӮo вҲӮПҲ 

вҠӨ

О»ЛҶx,k +1 (13b) Stacking (13) yields the gain-level gradient вҲҮОҳk L. Since the gains are generated from the latent policy output О·k through a smooth bounded reparameterization, the sensitivity required in (7) is obtained via the chain rule by propagating вҲҮОҳk L

through the Jacobian вҲӮОҳk 

> вҲӮО· k

.(a) (b) (c) Fig. 3. Trajectory evolution at representative training stages (Trials 50, 100, 150, and 200). (a) The DiffTune baseline exhibits persistent steady-state error, indicating limited adaptability when optimization is restricted to controller gains. (b) Adjoint substantially improves tracking performance, bringing the trajectory closer to the reference. (c) The proposed MetaTune method achieves the tightest tracking accuracy, suggesting that network-based parameterization can effectively exploit joint gradient information for precise control. 

In summary, the adjoint-based formulation yields an ef-ficient and scalable framework for gradient computation in closed-loop systems with coupled estimation and control. The resulting backward recursion naturally handles long-horizon dependencies and enables efficient parameter tuning in high-dimensional settings. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed MetaTune frame-work on a quadrotor platform to demonstrate joint auto-tuning of feedback controllers and disturbance observers. The quadrotor dynamics, control laws, and observer are fully dif-ferentiable, enabling end-to-end optimization via the proposed adjoint-based method. 

a) Dynamics: The quadrotor dynamics are described by 

Лҷp = v, m Лҷv = mge 3 вҲ’ f Re 3 + df ,

ЛҷR = RО©Г—, J ЛҷО© = вҲ’О©Г—JО© + П„ + dП„ ,

where p, v вҲҲ R3 and R вҲҲ SO(3) denote the position, velocity, and attitude of the quadrotor, and О© вҲҲ R3 is the body angular velocity. The mass and inertia matrix are denoted by m and 

J вҲҲ R3Г—3. The control inputs are the total thrust f and body torque П„ , while df and dП„ represent lumped aerodynamic disturbances. The operator (В·)Г— denotes the skew-symmetric mapping. Each task T вҲј p(T ) is defined by a wind distur-bance profile and a minimum-snap reference trajectory [26]вҖ“ [28], with varying disturbance magnitudes, directions, and trajectories. 

b) Geometric SE(3) Control with Disturbance Observer: 

We employ a geometric tracking controller on SE(3) [29] to generate the thrust f and torque П„ , parameterized by axis-wise gains kp, k v , k R, k О© вҲҲ R3, collected as Оё вҲҲ R12 . A nonlinear extended state observer (ESO) [30], [31] estimates lumped disturbances in translation and rotation, with gains ПҲ вҲҲ R6.The full parameter vector is Оҳ = [ Оё, ПҲ ]вҠӨ вҲҲ R18 .MetaTune is implemented in Python with JAX [32], lever-aging JIT compilation, vmap, and automatic differentiation to build a fully differentiable closed-loop simulator. 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Comparison Methods: We compare our adjoint-based approach against several forward-mode extensions derived from DiffTune [21]. The first baseline, DT-Base , represents the original implementation which optimizes only fixed controller gains. To evaluate joint tuning, we extend forward sensitiv-ity to both controller and observer parameters called DT-Fixed . For time-varying settings, we implement two variants: 

DT-Adaptive (History) , which propagates sensitivities once to accumulate gradients from past states, and DT-Adaptive (CTG) , which performs separate sensitivity computation at each update to capture the cost-to-go gradient. Our proposed methods, Adj-Fixed and Adj-Adaptive , lever-age reverse-mode adjoint sensitivity to compute gradients. The distinction between forward sensitivity rollout and reverse-mode adjoint computation is summarized in Fig. 2 (Sec. III).By integrating backward in time, these methods inherently capture the cost-to-go across the entire horizon. 

2) Objective Function: We use a quadratic per-step objec-tive defined over the system state, observer state, and control input, 

в„“(x, ЛҶx, u, r ) = вҲҘx вҲ’ xd(r)вҲҘ2 

> Wx

+ вҲҘЛҶx вҲ’ xвҲҘ2 

> WЛҶx

+ О»uвҲҘuвҲҘ2, (14) The weighting matrices Wx and WЛҶx are diagonal and assign different penalties to state and observer components. For 

DiffTune -based baselines, the observer-related entries of WЛҶx

are set to zero. The control penalty term О»uвҲҘuвҲҘ2 serves as a regularization on control effort. 

3) Learnable Policy Parameterization: The learnable policy is parameterized as a single-hidden-layer MLP with 128 ReLU units. Its input consists of the current observation, desired Fig. 4. RMSE over training iterations. 

state, ESO state, the polynomial coefficients of the active trajectory segment, and the current time. The network outputs an 18-dimensional vector corresponding to the controller and observer gains. The resulting gains are updated at 20 Hz and applied using zero-order hold between update instants. To ensure physical feasibility, the raw network outputs are mapped through a sigmoid function and scaled to lie within predefined safety bounds. The resulting gains are held constant between update instants using zero-order hold. The policy is trained using the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 10 вҲ’3.

B. Experimental Results in Differentiable Simulation 1) Physical Gradient Validation: We evaluate the correct-ness and computational efficiency of different gradient compu-tation strategies by directly optimizing controller and observer gains, and compare the proposed adjoint-based method with state-of-the-art differentiable tuning approaches. The training loss curves are shown in Fig. 4, and the final RMSE together with gradient computation time are summarized in Table I. The parity in RMSE between Adj-Fixed and DT-Fixed serves as a numerical validation of our derived adjoint equa-tions. This alignment confirms that backpropagating sensi-tivities through the closed-loop dynamics yields gradients physically consistent with standard forward sensitivity analysis in stationary parameter settings. While achieving comparable precision, the adjoint formulation significantly outperforms forward-mode differentiation in terms of efficiency. Even in the baseline case, Adj-Fixed reduces the computational footprint by over 50% compared to DT-Fixed, highlighting its superior scaling laws when dealing with high-dimensional differential simulations. A critical failure mode is observed in DT-Adaptive (His-tory), where a single forward rollout fails to correctly handle temporal credit assignment, leading to training instabilities. Conversely, while DT-Adaptive (CTG) recovers performance by explicitly recomputing cost-to-go gradients, its prohibitive computational cost renders it impractical for real-time appli-cations. In contrast, the Adj-Adaptive method achieves the lowest RMSE with orders-of-magnitude faster execution, prov-ing its efficacy for coupled, time-varying controller-observer optimization. 

2) Policy-Augmented Adaptation and Generalization: We further evaluate the full MetaTune framework with the MLP-based gain scheduling policy trained in the differentiable JAX                    

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF FINAL RMSE AND GRADIENT COMPUTATION TIME .
> Method Variant RMSE Time [s]
> Forward DT-Base 1.56 <10 вҲ’3
> DT-Fixed 0.69 0.57 DT-Adaptive (History) 15.58 1.52 DT-Adaptive (CTG) 0.92 17.81 Backward Adj-Fixed 0.69 0.25 Adj-Adaptive 0.67 0.27

simulator using the adjoint-based meta-gradient described in Sec. III. To assess the benefit of policy parameterization, we compare against gradient-based tuning methods that directly optimize gains without neural parameterization. The qualita-tive results in Fig. 3 support the following analysis. The DiffTune baseline exhibits limited adaptability under disturbance, primarily due to its reliance on forward-mode sensitivity with fixed controller parameters. In this setting, parameter updates are driven by local instantaneous gradients and cannot effectively compensate for disturbance-induced model mismatch, particularly when observer dynamics remain constrained. As a result, disturbance effects accumulate over time and manifest as residual tracking error. In contrast, adjoint-based tuning enables effective joint adaptation of controller and observer parameters by propa-gating cost-to-go sensitivities backward through the closed-loop system. This global temporal credit assignment allows disturbance-related errors to be correctly attributed to earlier parameter choices, leading to improved disturbance rejection and more consistent tracking behavior. 

C. Sim-to-Sim Transfer to PX4-Gazebo 

To evaluate sim-to-sim generalization, we deploy the policy trained in Sec. IV-B2 within the custom JAX-based differen-tiable dynamics environment to a high-fidelity PX4-Gazebo hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) simulator without additional fine-tuning.For comparison, we use the adjoint-optimized fixed-gain controller as the Baseline, and compare it against the learned MetaTune policy with adaptive gain scheduling. The PX4-Gazebo HIL environment incorporates more realistic aerodynamic effects, actuator dynamics, and low-level control constraints; it is employed exclusively for testing purposes. Both methods share the same controller and disturbance ob-server structures, while the proposed generates adaptive gains online via the learned neural policy. We evaluate tracking performance across multiple wind disturbances, flight speeds, and trajectory categories. 

1) Adaptation under High-Speed Flight: The experimental results in Table II illustrate a clear trend: while MetaTune and the Baseline yield comparable performance at low speeds (2 m/s), the adaptive policy becomes essential as flight regimes escalate in aggressiveness. Across tested trajectories and vary-ing wind conditions, MetaTune demonstrates superior gen-eralization, achieving an average RMSE reduction of ap-proximately 15 вҲ’ 20% at higher velocities when compared (a) (b) Fig. 5. Disturbance estimation and position tracking performance during hovering. (a) Estimated disturbance forces in the horizontal (XY) and vertical (Z) directions. (b) Position tracking along the X, Y, and Z axes. 

to the fixed-gain Baseline. The fixed-gain structure of the Baseline lacks the adaptability necessary to accommodate the nonlinear aerodynamic effects encountered during aggressive maneuvers. In contrast, MetaTune effectively compensates for model mismatches and transient aerodynamic effects in real time, demonstrating superior stability and responsiveness across diverse spatial trajectories. 

2) Robustness under Strong Disturbances: The robustness advantage of MetaTune becomes more pronounced as exter-nal wind torque disturbances increase to 1,N В·m and 2 N В·m. While the Baseline controller exhibits significant performance degradation under these persistent loadsвҖ”particularly during the dynamically demanding Figure-8 trajectoryвҖ”the adaptive policy maintains a much more consistent tracking profile. In extreme scenarios combining high-velocity flight with maxi-mum disturbance, MetaTune attains a reduction in RMSE of of approximately 40% when compared to the Baseline. This sub-stantial improvement underscores the efficacy of the learned joint controllerвҖ“observer adaptation. By real-time tuning of gains in response to external torques, MetaTune effectively mitigates the tracking divergence commonly observed in fixed-parameter controllers when the disturbance magnitude exceeds the nominal design envelope. 

3) Sim-to-Sim Generalization Capability: The experimental results provide strong evidence of MetaTuneвҖҷs zero-shot trans-

TABLE II TRACKING PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT WIND CONDITIONS AND 

VELOCITIES                                                                                                                                                                               

> Wind Vel. Method Trajectory Category (Mean ВұSD) 2D Circle 3D Circle Figure-8
> 0 NВ·m 2m/s Baseline 0.2397 Вұ0.0134 0.2400 Вұ0.0120 0.1819 Вұ0.0105
> Ours 0.2415 Вұ0.0131 0.2538 Вұ0.0160 0.1640 Вұ0.0139
> 3m/s Baseline 0.2726 Вұ0.0147 0.2172 Вұ0.0137 0.3145 Вұ0.0142
> Ours 0.2314 Вұ0.0195 0.1658 Вұ0.0092 0.2824 Вұ0.0158
> 4m/s Baseline 0.3465 Вұ0.0127 0.3968 Вұ0.0185 0.4252 Вұ0.0420
> Ours 0.2875 Вұ0.0126 0.3683 Вұ0.0256 0.3802 Вұ0.0226
> 1 NВ·m 2m/s Baseline 0.2323 Вұ0.0107 0.2427 Вұ0.0103 0.1454 Вұ0.0068
> Ours 0.2369 Вұ0.0143 0.2682 Вұ0.0160 0.1659 Вұ0.0166
> 3m/s Baseline 0.2363 Вұ0.0144 0.2149 Вұ0.0187 0.3189 Вұ0.0093
> Ours 0.2311 Вұ0.0159 0.1680 Вұ0.0072 0.2793 Вұ0.0118
> 4m/s Baseline 0.3299 Вұ0.0135 0.3829 Вұ0.0108 crash Ours 0.2769 Вұ0.0124 0.3249 Вұ0.0179 0.3881 Вұ0.0263
> 2 NВ·m 2m/s Baseline 0.2290 Вұ0.0080 0.2374 Вұ0.0148 0.1481 Вұ0.0043
> Ours 0.2505 Вұ0.0089 0.2725 Вұ0.0104 0.1684 Вұ0.0126
> 3m/s Baseline 0.2467 Вұ0.0131 0.1985 Вұ0.0132 0.3096 Вұ0.0127
> Ours 0.2199 Вұ0.0142 0.1692 Вұ0.0087 0.2774 Вұ0.0160
> 4m/s Baseline 0.3138 Вұ0.0176 0.3454 Вұ0.0169 crash Ours 0.2778 Вұ0.0147 0.3033 Вұ0.0178 0.4098 Вұ0.0149

fer capability. Despite being trained exclusively in a simplified differentiable JAX environment, the policy maintains effective adaptation when deployed in the high-fidelity PX4-Gazebo simulator without any fine-tuning. This robust performance across the sim-to-sim gap suggests that the physics-informed meta-learning framework captures fundamental closed-loop dynamics rather than overfitting to simulator-specific numerical traits. By internalizing the under-lying physical relationships, MetaTune ensures that the learned gain-scheduling laws remain valid even when subjected to the unmodeled actuator dynamics and sensor noise inherent in more realistic simulation environments. V. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

In this work, we presented MetaTune, a differentiable framework for automated controller and observer joint tuning that enables efficient end-to-end optimization of a neural adaptive policy. Compared with forward sensitivity methods, MetaTune significantly reduces gradient computation overhead 

(a) Circular trajectory (b) Double-eight trajectory (c) Planar figure-eight trajectory Fig. 6. Position error comparison under three trajectories. The proposed Meta controller significantly reduces oscillation amplitude compared with the baseline in X, Y, and Z axes. and improves scalability with respect to the horizon length and parameter dimension. Experiments in the high-fidelity PX4-Gazebo simulator show strong zero-shot generalization, achieving precision tracking across diverse trajectories and aerodynamic disturbances. Notably, MetaTune consistently outperforms fixed-gain baselines during high-speed flight and in windy conditions, highlighting the importance of state-dependent gain adaptation. These results suggest that ground-ing neural control policies in differentiable physics is apromising path toward robust robotic control. Future work will investigate broader real-world deployment and incorporate safety-critical constraints into the differentiable optimization framework to enhance robustness and reliability in safety-critical settings. REFERENCES [1] R. E. Kalman, вҖңA new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems,вҖқ 1960. [2] D. G. Luenberger, вҖңObserving the state of a linear system,вҖқ IEEE transactions on military electronics , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 74вҖ“80, 2007. [3] E. Sariyildiz, R. Oboe, and K. Ohnishi, вҖңDisturbance observer-based robust control and its applications: 35th anniversary overview,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2042вҖ“2053, 2019. [4] J. Han, вҖңFrom pid to active disturbance rejection control,вҖқ IEEE trans-actions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 900вҖ“906, 2009. [5] Z. Gao et al. , вҖңScaling and bandwidth-parameterization based controller tuning,вҖқ in Acc , vol. 4, 2003, pp. 989вҖ“4. [6] S. K. Spurgeon, вҖңSliding mode observers: a survey,вҖқ International journal of systems science , vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 751вҖ“764, 2008. [7] Z. Zhang, H. An, X. Wei, and H. Ma, вҖңUnknown slope-oriented research on model predictive control for quadruped robot,вҖқ Machines , vol. 11, no. 2, p. 133, 2023. [8] D. J. Leith and W. E. Leithead, вҖңSurvey of gain-scheduling analysis and design,вҖқ International journal of control , vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 1001вҖ“1025, 2000. [9] E. H. Mamdani, вҖңApplication of fuzzy algorithms for control of simple dynamic plant,вҖқ in Proceedings of the institution of electrical engineers ,vol. 121, no. 12. IET, 1974, pp. 1585вҖ“1588. [10] J.-J. Slotine and L. Weiping, вҖңAdaptive manipulator control: A case study,вҖқ IEEE transactions on automatic control , vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 995вҖ“1003, 2002. [11] R. Marine, G. L. Santosuosso, and P. Tomei, вҖңRobust adaptive observers for nonlinear systems with bounded disturbances,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on automatic control , vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 967вҖ“972, 2001. [12] G. Joshi and G. Chowdhary, вҖңDeep model reference adaptive control,вҖқ in 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 4601вҖ“4608. [13] J. He, B. Ren, Y. Xu, Q. Zhao, S. Du, and B. Wang, вҖңNeural network adaptive attitude control of full-states quad tiltrotor uav,вҖқ Aerospace ,vol. 12, no. 8, p. 684, 2025. [14] C. Giovanni, B. Leonard, and S. Davide, вҖңHdvio: Improving localization and disturbance estimation with hybrid dynamics vio,вҖқ in Robotics: Science and Systems conference (RSS), Daegu , 2023. [15] M. OвҖҷConnell, G. Shi, X. Shi, K. Azizzadenesheli, A. Anandkumar, Y. Yue, and S.-J. Chung, вҖңNeural-fly enables rapid learning for agile flight in strong winds,вҖқ Science Robotics , vol. 7, no. 66, p. eabm6597, 2022. [16] J. Pan, J. Xing, R. Reiter, Y. Zhai, E. Aljalbout, and D. Scaramuzza, вҖңLearning on the fly: Rapid policy adaptation via differentiable simula-tion,вҖқ IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2026. [17] S. M. Richards, N. Azizan, J.-J. Slotine, and M. Pavone, вҖңControl-oriented meta-learning,вҖқ The International Journal of Robotics Research ,vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 777вҖ“797, 2023. [18] Z. Chen, B. Qin, M. Sun, and Q. Sun, вҖңQ-learning-based parameters adaptive algorithm for active disturbance rejection control and its ap-plication to ship course control,вҖқ Neurocomputing , vol. 408, pp. 51вҖ“63, 2020. [19] G. Bujgoi and D. Sendrescu, вҖңTuning of pid controllers using reinforce-ment learning for nonlinear system control,вҖқ Processes , vol. 13, no. 3, p. 735, 2025. [20] M. Wei, L. Zheng, Y. Wu, R. Mei, and H. Cheng, вҖңMeta-learning enhanced model predictive contouring control for agile and precise quadrotor flight,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. [21] S. Cheng, M. Kim, L. Song, C. Yang, Y. Jin, S. Wang, and N. Ho-vakimyan, вҖңDifftune: Auto-tuning through auto-differentiation,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2024. [22] B. Wang, Z. Ma, S. Lai, and L. Zhao, вҖңNeural moving horizon estimation for robust flight control,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 639вҖ“659, 2023. [23] N. Hovakimyan and C. Cao, L1 adaptive control theory: Guaranteed robustness with fast adaptation . SIAM, 2010. [24] T. Akman, B. Hosseini, J. Diepolder, B. GrВЁ uter, R. Afonso, M. Gerdts, and F. Holzapfel, Efficient sensitivity calculation for robust optimal control . Deutsche Gesellschaft fВЁ ur Luft-und Raumfahrt-Lilienthal-Oberth eV, 2020. [25] J. A. Andersson, J. Gillis, G. Horn, J. B. Rawlings, and M. Diehl, вҖңCasadi: a software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control,вҖқ Mathematical Programming Computation , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1вҖ“36, 2019. [26] P. Martin and E. SalaВЁ un, вҖңThe true role of accelerometer feedback in quadrotor control,вҖқ in 2010 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation . IEEE, 2010, pp. 1623вҖ“1629. [27] D. Mellinger and V. Kumar, вҖңMinimum snap trajectory generation and control for quadrotors,вҖқ in 2011 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation . IEEE, 2011, pp. 2520вҖ“2525. [28] C. Richter, A. Bry, and N. Roy, вҖңPolynomial trajectory planning for aggressive quadrotor flight in dense indoor environments,вҖқ in Robotics Research: The 16th International Symposium ISRR . Springer, 2016, pp. 649вҖ“666. [29] T. Lee, M. Leok, and N. H. McClamroch, вҖңGeometric tracking control of a quadrotor uav on se (3),вҖқ in 49th IEEE conference on decision and control (CDC) . IEEE, 2010, pp. 5420вҖ“5425. [30] M. Sharma and I. Kar, вҖңNonlinear disturbance observer based geometric control of quadrotors,вҖқ Asian Journal of Control , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1936вҖ“1951, 2021. [31] H. Miao, J. Ye, Y. Bin, T. Jiang, Y. Yu, and D. Lin, вҖңRobust adaptive attitude control for agile maneuver of quadrotors based on finite-time geometric extended state observer,вҖқ Nonlinear Dynamics , vol. 112, no. 21, pp. 19 147вҖ“19 168, 2024. [32] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclau-rin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne et al. ,вҖңJax: composable transformations of python+ numpy programs,вҖқ 2018.