Title: Fixed-phase Resonance Tracking for Fast Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22889v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:07:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
# Fixed-phase Resonance Tracking for Fast Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy 

Jan Kober a, Radovan Zeman a,b, ∗, Marco Scalerandi c

> aInstitute of Thermomechanics Czech Academy of Sciences Prague Czechia
> bFaculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering Czech Technical University in Prague Czechia
> cDISAT Condensed Matter Physics and Complex Systems Institute Politecnico di Torino Italy

Abstract 

Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (NRUS) experiments that rely on repeated sampling of resonance curves are inherently sensitive to mea-surement protocol due to evolution of material parameters caused by fast and slow dynamic effects. We introduce a model-assisted discrete-time res-onance tracking method that maintains a system at its instantaneous res-onance condition without the need to acquire full frequency sweeps. Res-onance is defined through a prescribed phase relation between excitation and response, and the excitation frequency is iteratively updated using a lin-earized frequency–phase model. The procedure allows controlled suppression of transient wave buildup using optional feedforward correction with respect to external control parameter. The method is demonstrated on NRUS and on conditioning–relaxation protocol conducted on sandstone bar, providing es-timates of resonance frequency and damping. Comparison with conventional approaches shows that measurement speed and mode stability significantly influence the inferred nonlinear indicators. The proposed framework is not limited to nonlinear acoustics and can be applied to arbitrary resonant sys-tems with slowly evolving parameters. 

Keywords: nonlinear resonant ultrasound spectroscopy, consolidated granular media, slow dynamics   

> ∗Corresponding author.
> Email address: rzeman@it.cas.cz (Radovan Zeman)
> arXiv:2604.22889v1 [eess.IV] 24 Apr 2026

1. Introduction 

Nonlinear elasticity in materials with a grain structure at the mesoscopic level (rocks [1, 2, 3, 4], concrete and mortar [5, 6, 7], metal alloys [8, 9], glass beads [10], etc.) is made complex by the presence of different sources of non-linearity. The anharmonicity of crystalline lattices (dislocations, inclusions and vacancies) is responsible for classical nonlinearity [11, 12], while material structural features at a larger spatial scale, called mesoscale, are sources of hysteresis [13, 14, 15]. Furthermore, slow dynamic effects are often present, resulting in conditioning and relaxation phenomena (slow dynamics) which have an explicit time dependence [16, 17, 18, 19, 20] and are intrinsically cou-pled with fast nonlinear effects [3, 21]. That makes it difficult to understand the physics responsible, going beyond phenomenological models currently de-veloped and based on multirelaxtion theory [22, 23, 24] or physically based approaches [25, 26, 4, 27]. At the same time, quantification of nonlinearity is of interest because of practical application in the field of materials [28, 29, 30] and buildings [31] characterization. Nonlinear elastic parameters are indeed very sensitive to the presence of microstructural changes: presence of lo-calized damage [32] or thermal/carbonation damage [33, 34], variations in water saturation [35, 36, 37], size of grains [38, 39] and anisotropy induced nonlinearity [40, 41]. For both theoretical and experimental reasons mentioned above, the de-velopment of experimental approaches, which are reliable and accurate in the lab and extendable to field applications, is of importance. Various techniques have been proposed: harmonics evaluation [42], coda wave interferometry [43], Scaling Subtraction Method [44, 45], wave mixing [46, 47]. Among oth-ers, Nonlinear Resonance Ultrasound Spectroscopy (NRUS) [48, 30, 49, 50, 51] has several advantages, because the procedure is easy to implement and very sensitive to microstructural changes in the material. Furthermore, it can be easily implemented for long time monitoring [52]. The limitations are mostly due to the fact that it provides averaged information over the entire specimen volume, thus it is not particularly suitable for localization, even though a few modifications of the procedure where introduced to allow it [53, 54]. The technique is exploited in different ways, the most common being based on measuring the resonance curve around one of the longitu-dinal modes by sweeping the frequency at a given amplitude of excitation and increasing the drive amplitude to quantify the dependence of resonance frequency and damping on strain amplitude. 2NRUS presents two main sources of bias which might be affecting its reliability in determining and quantifying the modulus (and damping) non-linearity of a given sample: 

• by its nature, NRUS estimates nonlinearity making use of the full res-onance curve, that means probing the sample at different frequencies. However, at each frequency, the material is probed at a different strain amplitude (given by the amplitude of the resnonance curve at the cor-responding frequency) and thus a different nonlinearity is probed [21], hence a sort of averaging. Furthermore, at each frequency, the sample is probed when excited at different strain profiles, being the strain spa-tial profile different if the excitation is at the resonance frequency or far from it; 

• NRUS is based on sweeping with continuous waves over a given fre-quency range. That implies NRUS measurement is far from being in-stantaneous which might be an issue due to cumulative conditioning induced by slow dynamics. That leads to observations which could be dependent on the duration of the experiment [55] and do not allow to either separate well classical from hysteretic nonlinearity or to resolve the very first instances during relaxation [56]. The use of chirp, rather than sweeping over frequency with monochro-matic waves allows using shorter signals, but does never ensure stationary standing wave conditions, being the sample only consistently close to them during wave propagation [57]. Provided the signal is long enough, transient waves contribute only slightly and chirp signals allow to probe the sample equivalently to a sweep over frequency using monochromatic waves for what concerns the resonance frequency, while some issues might arise for the quan-tification of the Q factor. Probing the material with monochromatic waves at fixed frequency and increasing amplitude [58], is also a very fast alterna-tive (ensuring reaching of perfect standing wave conditions in a short time at each amplitude), but has the drawback that the material as mentioned will be probed with a different spatial strain profile at each amplitude, thus the method does not strictly test the "same" material at each amplitude. The goal here is to propose an alternative approach that remains consis-tent with the conventional NRUS, overcoming its two limitations. Unlike in the conventional approach we aim to probe the sample using for each drive 3amplitude a single continuous excitation of frequency that is iteratively mod-ified to track the resonance as the resonance frequency evolves due to change in amplitude and slow dynamics. For this purpose, a resonance tracking procedure exploiting the phase properties of the resonance curve is devel-oped involving an iterative correction of the deviation from resonance and prediction for the following amplitude. Phase-based frequency tracking has been previously employed in non-linear dynamics for the backbone curve identification. In systems with in-stantaneous nonlinearities, such as Duffing-type oscillators, the amplitude-dependent resonance frequency defines the so-called backbone curve, which characterizes the intrinsic nonlinear behavior of the system [59, 60, 61]. Phase-based criteria are commonly employed to identify this condition, as resonance corresponds to a specific phase relation between excitation and response. Such approaches have been widely used in nonlinear modal anal-ysis, micro- and nano-mechanical resonators, and atomic force microscopy [62, 63]. In nonlinear dynamics, phase-locked loop (PLL) techniques are frequently employed to track the backbone curve by continuously adjusting the excita-tion frequency to maintain a prescribed phase condition [64, 65]. PLL-based approaches provide efficient frequency synchronization; however, they are primarily control-oriented and do not incorporate an explicit model of the resonant system or separate transient wave buildup from parameter identifi-cation. In contrast, the method proposed here is formulated as a discrete-time, model-assisted resonance tracking procedure tailored to resonant material spectroscopy. The excitation frequency is updated iteratively based on the measured phase condition, while explicitly accounting for transient wave buildup and incorporating optional feedforward terms associated with con-trolled variations of experimental parameters. The objective is not merely frequency locking, but controlled tracking of a resonance condition suitable for extracting material parameters even in the presence of evolving elastic properties. The method to track the resonance frequency at varying amplitude is discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, experimental details are given together with some experimental results and the prove of the consistency of the results of the approach with respect to measurements obtained using conventional NRUS or chirp. We also discuss the loss of accuracy in NRUS. In Section 4 some applications are discussed, in particular for what concerns conditioning 48.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8                 

> f[kHz]
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> ε [με]
> a)
> 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8
> f[kHz]
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
> arg  Z [rad]
> b)
> 0 V (L) 51 V (L) 102 V (L) 150 V (L) 122 V (U) 71 V (U) 21 V (U) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> ε[με]
> 8.38 8.40 8.42 8.44 8.46 8.48
> fres  [kHz]
> c) argmax ε
> ∆φ= 0

Figure 1: Experimental data from NRUS, selection of excitation amplitudes from loading (L) and unloading (U), a) strain amplitude vs. frequency, b) phase vs. frequency. Com-parison of resonance frequency obtained fitting the maximum of the amplitudes (black) and that obtained using the phase-based definition (red). 

and relaxation monitoring. Conclusions and discussion will finally be given. 

2. Method 

2.1. Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy 2.1.1. Amplitude-based resonance frequency estimation 

Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (NRUS) is commonly im-plemented by measuring the frequency response of a selected resonance mode from which the resonance frequency (position of the maximum) and attenu-ation (often derived from the peak width) are extracted. By repeating such measurements at different excitation amplitudes, amplitude-dependent shifts of the resonance frequency and changes in attenuation are used as indicators of elastic nonlinearity. Often the excitation amplitude protocol includes a loading phase (amplitude increases) followed by an unloading phase (ampli-tude decreases). While conceptually straightforward, this conventional implementation im-plicitly assumes that the material parameters remain constant during the acquisition of each resonance curve. In nonlinear materials exhibiting condi-tioning and slow dynamics, this assumption is generally not satisfied. Mate-rial properties evolve on time scales comparable to, or even longer than, the duration of a single frequency sweep, leading to resonance curves that do not correspond to a stationary system. As a consequence, the measured material parameters depend not only on the excitation amplitude but also on the experimental protocol. In par-ticular, the estimated resonance frequency and attenuation are sensitive to the sweep rate, the frequency step size, the order in which the amplitudes 5and frequencies are applied and the waiting time allowed for stabilization at each frequency. In particular, when the sample is probed using a sequence of increasing (loading) and decreasing (unloading) amplitudes, different val-ues of the material parameters are observed for the same amplitudes. The typical results of an NRUS measurement are illustrated in Fig. 1, obtained on a sandstone sample excited at its first longitudinal mode, where both the loading and unloading branches are measured. The difference in loading and unloading amplitude dependences and the shapes of the peaks themselves indicates slow dynamic behavior. As a consequence, the measured material parameters depend not only on the excitation amplitude but to some extent on the experimental protocol as well. Despite the limitations, this approach to NRUS remains widely used be-cause it provides a direct visualization of the resonance behavior and allows a straightforward extraction of amplitude-dependent indicators. However, the protocol dependence discussed above raises the question of whether measur-ing the full resonance curve is necessary (or even whether it is correct) to define the resonance frequency itself, or whether equivalent information can be obtained in a way that is less time-consuming and thus leads to reduction of the protocol-dependent slow dynamic effects. 

2.1.2. Phase-based resonance frequency estimation 

An alternative theoretical definition of resonance is the phase difference between the excitation and the measured response (Fig. 1b). While the shape of the resonance curves is affected by elastic nonlinearity and slow dynamics, the phase exhibits a well-defined and reproducible crossing of a reference value at the resonance. The experimental data demonstrate that the frequency at which the phase crosses this reference value coincides with the frequency of the maximum response amplitude (Fig. 1c) and can be used as a robust means of identification of the resonance frequency (compare the noise in the estimation based on the amplitude and phase in Fig. 1c). Importantly, this definition remains meaningful even when the resonance curve itself is distorted or evolving due to nonlinear and memory effects (slow dynamics). The specific value of the phase at resonance depends on which physical quantities are measured and on the measurement configuration, as discussed in Section 3.2. This phase-based definition of resonance forms the basis for the resonance tracking procedure in Section 2.3. 62.2. Analytical model of resonance response 

It is possible to express the steady state responses of amplitude and phase dependences on frequency analytically for a linear elastic material. Here we follow the Modulus and Damping Nonlinearities Evaluation (MoDaNE) [58, 66] approach. When a bar of length L is excited at one end ( x = 0 ) by a monochromatic forcing of frequency f (with zero initial phase) near its nth longitudinal mode, the displacement of the other end ( x = L) is u (t) = a exp j (2 πf t + φ) with the amplitude and phase given by 

a (f ) = U0

q

cosh 2 (αL ) − cos 2 (πf /f res )

, (1) 

φ (f ) = πn − arctan 

tan ( πf /f res )tanh ( αL )



, (2) where α is a damping coefficient and fres is the resonance frequency, U0 is the displacement amplitude at x = 0 . The solution predicts that the displace-ments of the bar ends at resonance oscillate with either same or opposite phase. However, in experiments the phase corresponding to the resonance generally differs from the theoretical prediction. The phase offset, possible delays in the aquisition chain and the efficiency and frequency dependence of excitation are properties of the experimental setup, which need to be cali-brated (see Section 3.2). It can be seen from the experimental data obtained in the linear regime in Fig. 2, that the analytical solution fits perfectly. To obtain the setup parameters, a linear characterization is needed. To this purpose, the resonance curve of the sample must be measured by sweep-ing frequency in a narrow range around one mode, and a fit using Eqs. 1and 2 allows estimating linear velocity (resonance frequency) and damping, together with the calibration parameters. The linear characterization is per-formed using a very low amplitude to avoid inducing nonlinear effects. The fit of the experimental curves is excellent, see Fig. 2. The calibration pa-rameters, are a property of the acquisition chain, thus, assuming the setup linear, they are the same for each excitation amplitude. In the following, we adopt a normalized formulation of the MoDaNE equations. Rather than working with absolute displacement amplitudes (re-quiring scaling of amplitude-related parameters), we use the complex transfer function between transmitted and received signals ( ytx and yrx ). This nor-malization eliminates the dependence of parameters on the drive amplitude, 78.0 8.5 9.0     

> f[kHz]
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> |Z| [−]
> a)
> 8.0 8.5 9.0
> f[kHz]
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
> arg  Z [rad]
> b)
> exp. data MoDaNE fit resonance lin. approx.

Figure 2: Resonance curve (experimental data) fitted using MoDaNE (correction in-cluded), a) amplitude and b) phase vs. frequency. A linear approximation of the phase curve at resonance is shown as a red dashed line. 

allowing the intrinsic resonance frequency and damping to be estimated solely from the measured phase and normalized amplitude. More specifically, from the Fourier components of the source and measured signals calculated at the excitation frequency f using DFT, we define 

Z (f ) ≡ F [yrx ] ( f )

F [ytx ] ( f ) = a (f ) exp jφ (f ) . (3) Inversion of Eqs. 1 and 2 enables estimation of resonance frequency and damping based on a measurement of phase arg Z and amplitude |Z| of a single monochromatic excitation at a given frequency as 

fres = f

1 + sign( φ−πn ) 

> πn

arctan pr/ 2 cos 2 φ, (4) 

α = 1

L argtanh 

q

r/ 2 sin 2 φ, (5) where 

r = − a2

U 20

− cos 2 φ +

s

1 + a4

U 40

+ 2 a2

U 20

cos 2 φ. (6) We emphasize that MoDaNE describes a stationary standing wave, thus the transient oscillation buildup following a change in excitation amplitude or frequency must subside before data acquisition. 82.3. Resonance tracking 2.3.1. Phase feedback and amplitude feedforward tracking 

Let us consider a sample excited with a monochromatic wave at driving frequency f . If the material parameters evolve in time, e.g., due to nonlinear effects induced by varying excitation amplitude, the resonance frequency of the sample is different at each probing. Thus frequency of the excitation must be updated, if we wish to ensure excitation at resonance at each time (and amplitude), which guarantees both maximum strain and invariant strain profile along the material spatial dimension. As long as the excitation frequency f is matched to the resonance fre-quency fres , the observed phase is equal to the resonance value. When the material parameters evolve, the resonance frequency shifts and a non-zero phase difference emerges, denoted as ∆ϕ ≡ arg Z − nπ . The aim of the fol-lowing procedure is an iterative updating of the driving frequency f when the material parameters change to remove the phase difference ∆ϕ, i.e., tracking the resonance frequency. A linear approximation of the phase curve near resonance (to improve robustness to measurement noise and stability) can be considered: 

∆ϕ (f ) ≈ k (f − fres ) , (7) which allows estimation of the resonance frequency fres based on the observed 

∆ϕ and updating the excitation frequency to this estimate (phase feedback). The local slope negative k is given by the resonance frequency and damping (see Eq. 2) 

k = − πfres tanh αL . (8) As material parameters evolve, k also changes, and updating it during the course of the measurement based on estimates of fres and α from MoDaNE inversion is beneficial. In this paper, we focus on nonlinear variations of the resonance frequency 

fres due to the increase in the amplitude of excitation. When a step in exci-tation amplitude is applied, the material parameters change abruptly and a substantial deviation from the resonance condition ∆ϕ = 0 arises. Updating the excitation frequency iteratively based on the observed phase difference to the estimate of the resonance frequency from Eq. 7 will converge to the 9resonance (i.e. using the phase feedback only), and it is in principle suffi-cient. However, anticipating the resonance frequency shift due the amplitude change and taking it into account together with the measured ∆ϕ expedites reaching the resonance (amplitude feedforward control). The contribution of this feature to the efficiency of the resonance tracking procedure is demon-strated in Section 3.4. In general, the frequency shift caused by the excitation amplitude change is unknown (given by an unknown amplitude dependence of frequency vari-ation and time). Here we introduce a local empirical model assuming the frequency shift is proportional to the change in excitation amplitude ∆A:

∆fres = ℓ∆A. (9) The unknown coefficient ℓ is to be learned during measurement. In the cases of interest, an amplitude increase produces softening hence ℓ < 0. Note that this linear model does not imply a linear dependence of the resonance frequency on the amplitude as ℓ can be interpreted as a local derivative of the amplitude function for the current amplitude. 

2.3.2. Updating rules 

Let us assume that within iteration i the sample is excited with drive frequency fi at drive amplitude Ai and observe an output amplitude ai and phase difference ∆ϕi are measured. Taking into account the linearized ex-pression for the phase, we can calculate the frequency fi+1 to be used with the following drive amplitude Ai+1 as 

fi+1 = fi − ∆ϕi

ki

− ℓi (Ai+1 − Ai) . (10) In the right-hand side of the equation, the second term corrects the current deviation from resonance (phase feedback) and the third term takes into account the following amplitude step (feedforward). ki can be estimated substituting estimates of resonance frequency fres ,i and damping coefficient 

αi (obtained using the MoDaNE inversion of measured ai and ∆ϕi) into Eq. 8. The amplitude coefficient ℓi can be updated only after changing the drive amplitude. If no change in amplitude was applied, i.e., Ai = Ai−1, the current measurement does not provide any information on the amplitude effects and thus ℓ cannot be updated (we keep the previous value). If Ai̸ = Ai−1, the 10 coefficient ℓ is defined as a shift of the resonance frequency caused by the change in amplitude divided by the amplitude step. The updating rule can be written as 

ℓi = fres ,i − fres ,i −1

Ai − Ai−1

if Ai̸ = Ai−1. (11) Note that while k can be estimated immediately within the first iteration (or initialized based on linear characterization), ℓ remains unknown until the drive amplitude is changed for the first time. In this case, the amplitude feedforward term in Eq. 10 is omitted, i.e., only a correction of the observed phase difference is performed. The initial steps of the procedure are illustrated in Fig. 3 and explained step-by-step in the caption. 

2.3.3. Boosting robustness 

In experiments, the updating rules defining k and ℓ might be affected by the propagation of errors from the measurement of phases. It is preferable to boost robustness of the process, even though the convergence rate towards the resonance might be reduced. To this purpose, Eqs. 8 and 11 are replaced with an exponential moving averaging to smooth the evolution, 

ki = −β πfres ,i tanh αiL + (1 − β) ki−1 (12) 

ℓi = β′ fres ,i − fres ,i −1

Ai − Ai−1

+ (1 − β′) ℓi−1 if Ai̸ = Ai−1. (13) The weight parameters can be tuned to optimize the procedure. In the following, we used β = β′ = 0 .5.

2.3.4. Summary of the procedure 

To summarize the resonance tracking procedure, the measurement con-sists of repeated evaluation of the following algorithm: 1. Acquire the signals, calculate ai and ∆ϕi and estimate fres ,i and αi

using MoDaNE inversion (Eqs. 1 and 2). 2. Update the phase slope ki using Eq. 12. 3. Update the amplitude coefficient ℓi using Eq. 13. 4. Update the excitation frequency fi+1 using Eq. 10. 5. Set the generator to the excitation frequency fi+1 and the amplitude 

Ai+1 .6. Wait until the transient phase subsides and repeat. 11 f0f1f2f3 f

> 0
> ∆φ0
> ∆φ1
> ∆φ2
> ∆φ
> A0A1
> A2A3∆φ0
> k0∆φ1
> k1∆φ2
> k2

a) res. frequency phase curve exp. datapoint linear approx. 

> A0
> A1
> A2
> A3
> A
> 6
> `1
> 6
> `2
> `1∆A2`2∆A3

b) Figure 3: Schematic representation of the initial steps of the procedure. a) Phase vs. frequency at different drive amplitudes (different colours), the circles represent the testing frequency and the corresponding measured phase shift. b) Amplitude dependence of res-onance fres and drive f frequency. The procedure starts at amplitude A0 (blue line) with drive frequency f0 slightly higher (for illustrative purposes) than the resonance frequency 

fres ,0 (blue square), observing a non-zero ∆ϕ0 (blue circle). The feedback correction (blue range) is given by the linearization slope k0. ℓ0 is unknown, thus feedforward is not ap-plied and f1 is roughly equal to fres ,0. Increasing the amplitude to A1 > A 0 (orange line) and testing frequency to f1 gives a significant phase difference ∆ϕ1 (orange circle) as f1 is far from the resonance frequency fres ,1 (orange square). In this iteration ℓ1 can be calculated based on estimates of fres ,0 and fres ,1. Determination of f2 includes both the phase-feedback correction (first orange range) and feedforward adjustement (second orange range), thus measurement at amplitude A2 (green line) and frequency f2 is per-formed close to the resonance fres ,2 (green square), resulting in a low phase difference ∆ϕ2

(green circle). The procedure is then repeated for the following amplitudes. 

12 sandstone sample laser vibrometer PZT disk 140 mm 25 mm Figure 4: Experimental setup. 

3. Demonstration 

The proposed method is demonstrated through testing of a sandstone sample and performing a resonance tracking NRUS. We show here that the procedure keeps a constant phase shift during the experiment even when the material properties are evolving in time due to slow dynamic effects. 

3.1. Experimental setup 

The experimental data are obtained using the experimental setup illus-trated in Fig. 4. A prismatic sandstone sample ( 140 × 25 × 25 mm , see [21] for material parameters) is suspended horizontally in order to obtain free boundary conditions. The sample is excited using a PZT disk (APC 20 × 2 mm ring) glued to one of the bases and driven using a Tabor 9400 power amplifier (up to 150 V ). We tracked the resonance frequency of the first longitudinal mode at approx. 

8.5 kHz . The amplifier monitor output (high amplitude output divided by 100) is used as the ytx signal. A Polytec OFV-505 laser vibrometer with OFV-5000 controller is used to measure surface velocity of the free end ( yrx 

signal). The velocity is converted into strain in the center of the sample using the linear approximation ε = ˙ u (L) /v L, where vL is the linear longitudinal wave velocity. The transducer and vibrometer are connected to a Keysight / Signadyne M3300A arbitrary waveform generator and oscilloscope, respectively. The signal generator allows continuous adjustment of frequency and amplitude without phase discontinuities, ensuring uninterrupted excitation. The sig-nals yrx and ytx are recorded in 5 ms pieces with a sampling rate of 5 MS /s

for the purposes of the resonance tracking algorithm. In addition, a con-tinuous acquisition at 1 MS /s of the same signals is used to evaluate the 13 amplitude and phase shift during the measurement process. This supple-mentary data provides information about the response of the system to the resonance tracking procedure and is not needed for measuring the nonlinear response of the material. The resonance tracking is based exclusively on the 

5 ms long signals. 

3.2. Linear characterization 

The linear characterization (calibration) is performed by measuring the resonance on a low amplitude, providing estimates of the parameters used in the MoDaNE solution. It allows to compensate for effects of the experimental setup which make the experimentally observed data differ from the theory due to a frequency dependent response (e.g. the gain of the amplifier or the transducers response), the time delays in the signals transmision, losses etc. These effects introduce a frequency dependent amplitude scaling and phase shift. Assuming experiments are performed in a small frequency range, corrections (linear in frequency), which are multiplicative for amplitude and additive for phase, have been introduced. It follows: 

aexp (f ) = q0 + q1f

q

cosh 2 (αL ) − cos 2 (πf /f res )

, (14) 

φexp (f ) = p0 + p1f − arctan 

tan ( πf /f res )tanh ( αL )



, (15) where q0 + q1f represents the displacement amplitude in x = 0 and p0 +

p1f accounts for the phase shift and the delay in time (which is linear in frequency). If the normalized formulation of MoDaNE is used (applying it to the transfer function instead of displacement), the parameters do not depend on the excitation amplitude. The resonance peak is sampled using sine excitation at very low amplitude (1 V ) covering a bandwith of 1.6 kHz with steps of 8 Hz , each frequency is excited for 15 ms with only 5 ms measured (ensuring stationary standing wave conditions). The resonance curve (Fig. 2) is then used to estimate (corrected) MoDaNE parameters in Eqs. 14 and 15. The results from calibration are then applied for each amplitude of ex-citation. Having measured the response Z on excitation frequency f , the theoretical amplitude and phase are 

a = |Z|

q0 + q1f and φ = arg Z − p0 − p1f + πn, (16) 14 1.35 1.40 1.45 1.50                    

> ytx,rx  [V]
> a)
> transmitter receiver 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> ytx,rx  [V]
> b)
> 0.17 0.18 0.19 0.20
> α [m−1]
> c)
> -10.00 -5.00 0.00 5.00
> ∆φ [mrad]
> d)
> -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02
> ∆φ [rad]
> e) -13 -14 -15
> k [mrad Hz −1]f)
> 3.00 3.01 3.02 3.03 3.04 3.05
> t[s]
> 8420 8421 8422 8423 8424
> f [Hz]
> g)
> ffres
> 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
> t[s]
> 8.42 8.44 8.46 8.48 8.50 8.52
> f [kHz]
> h)
> 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
> t[s]
> 0-20 -40
> ` [Hz V −1]
> i)

Figure 5: Measurement protocol and resonance tracking. Subplots in second and third column contain experimental data from the resonance tracking procedure during the entire course of experiment. First column shows a zoomed-in short window that includes both data from the resonance tracking (points) and from the continuous acquisition (lines). ab) Excitation (blue) and measured (orange) amplitudes. The real transmitter voltage is 100 ×

higher. de) Phase difference from resonnace tracking (green) and from continuous acquis-tion (black). gh) Excitation frequency (dots and red line) and estimate using MoDaNE inversion (circle). c) Damping estimate using MoDaNE inversion. f) Phase curve slope. i) Amplitude feedforward coefficient. 

These values can be analytically inverted for the estimation of the resonance frequency and damping using MoDaNE inversion (see [58]). We also redefine 

∆ϕ ≡ arg Z − p0 − p1f for the purpose of the resonance tracking procedure. 

3.3. Resonance tracking implementation 

The nonlinear response of the sample is measured using a sequence of uniformly spaced excitation amplitudes (monochromatic waves) that includes loading (increasing) followed by unloading (decreasing). The course of the experiment, including all resonance tracking-related quantities, is shown in Fig. 5, where the full temporal evolution is shown in the central column and a zoom in a short time window is reported in the left column using continuously recorded data. The excitation amplitude A starts at a low amplitude ( 0.5 V ) and it grows up to 150 V with a step of approx. 2.5 V .After reaching its maximum, A decreases to the initial amplitude. For each amplitude, the nominal source frequency f is defined applying the resonance tracking procedure. 15 As discussed previously, continuous signal acquisition of both injected (divided by 100) and received signals is performed. Discrete signals are also recorded (both source and received). For each amplitude of excitation, a 

5 ms long signal is recorded once standing wave conditions are reached, i.e., starting 10 ms after the amplitude change occurred and ending just before the switch to the following amplitude. Signals allow to calculate the temporal evolution of the amplitude of the source and received signals ytx and yrx (blue and orange curves/symbols in Fig. 5ab), the frequency of the received signal 

f (subplots g and h) and the phase difference (subplots d and e). Results from continuous acquisition are shown as solid lines only in plots in the left column, while results from discrete acquisition are reported as symbols. Within the 15 ms duration of the excitation at a given amplitude and fre-quency (see the first column of Fig. 5 to appreciate details), we can observe the time instances at which the amplitude is changed (vertical blue dashed lines). Note also the result of the discrete acquisition given by the circles just before the amplitude change. Slightly later, the frequency at the generator is changed (vertical dashed red lines) and kept constant. The slight delay between the amplitude and the frequency change is due to signal processing that is performed after changing the amplitude. As soon as the drive ampli-tude increases, the resonance frequency starts dropping (conditioning time regulates the time needed to achieve the new value), thus f > f res , and a negative phase appears. Later, f is updated through the resonance tracking protocol and the behavior of the phase follows the adjustement of f to fres ,mixed up with some effects due to the transient condition. At the end of each iteration, the strain reaches a steady state, and the phase difference falls to a proximity of zero. The measurement here is meaningful since we are in standing wave conditions. The behavior is highly repeatable in the course of the experiment. Overall, each amplitude step corresponds to one iteration of the proce-dure and yields one datapoint (strain, phase, testing frequency), from which material properties can be calculated using MoDaNE equations (resonance frequency fres and damping α) and the parameters for resonance tracking can be updated ( k and ℓ). Their temporal evolutions are reported in the second and third column of Fig. 5. The amplitude coefficient ℓ (Fig. 5i) is initially undefined and is learned when the amplitude is changed. The resonance tracking algorithm maintains the phase difference ∆ϕ close to zero (Fig. 5e) by decreasing the excitation frequency (Fig. 5h), as the material is softening during the loading branch and viceversa during unloading. The 16 estimates of the resonance frequency (not shown) are almost superimposed on the excitation frequency. Damping coefficient (Fig. 5c) are used to up-date the phase curve slope k (Fig. 5f), which is correlated with α as the slope is affected particularly by damping (Eq. 8). The amplitude coefficient 

ℓ (Fig. 5i), defined using Eq. 9, approximates the derivative of the resonance frequency with respect to excitation amplitude, thus it can be noticed to decrease as long as the dependence (see results shown later in Fig. 7a) gets steeper, i.e. where the derivative of the resonance frequency with respect to strain increases. 

3.4. Efficiency of the resonance tracking procedure 

To demonstrate the contribution of individual features of the resonance tracking algorithm, the very same experiment was repeated but disabling one by one the features used for resonance tracking. As illustrated in Fig. 6a, measuring at a fixed frequency (i.e. not applying any resonance track-ing) results in an increase in the phase difference ∆ϕ to more than 0.7 rad 

as the excitation amplitude increases, which is expected as the resonance frequency drops. In the absence of amplitude feedforward control ( ℓ fixed to zero), phase differences approximate zero, with slightly superior outcomes observed for adaptive phase slope k (i.e. when a flattening of the phase curve due to increasing damping is taken into account). However, the phase differ-ence is consistently negative when the amplitude is increasing (the resonance frequency is overestimated) and positive during unloading (the resonance fre-quency is underestimated). Resonance tracking without feedforward control is always one step behind. The issue is resolved through the implementation of amplitude feedforward (full resonance tracking): initially the phase differ-ence follows roughly the same curve as the previously mentioned datasets but when the coefficient ℓ is learned during the process, it stabilizes near zero, exhibiting no offset between the loading and unloading branches. Adjusting the phase curve slope and predicting the effect of the amplitude steps indeed both contribute to the efficiency of the resonance tracking. Fig. 6b shows the distribution (kernel density estimation) of the deviation of the excitation frequency from the resonance, ∆f = f − fres for the same data as in Fig. 6, illustrating the position on the resonance peak. 17 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 

t [s] 

> 0.05 0.00 -0.05 -0.20 -0.40 -0.60 -0.80
> ∆φ [rad]

a)            

> full
> `= 0
> fixed k
> fixed f
> -500 -400 -300 -200 -100 0100 200 300

∆f [Hz] 

> 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2
> KDE  [−]

b)   

> -5 050.0 0.5 1.0
> 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5
> |ytx | [V]
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
> |Z| [−]

Figure 6: Phase difference (a) and distribution of excitation frequency deviations from the resonance obtained as kernel density estimation (b) during a measurement with increas-ing and decreasing amplitudes (cyan) performed without the resonance tracking (red), with a fixed phase slope k and no amplitude feedforward (green), with adaptive k and no amplitude feedforward (orange) and using full resonance tracking with the amplitude feedforward (blue). 

18 4. Applications 

A few applications of the resonance tracking based NRUS procedure are given here to demonstrate the usefulness and advantages of the proposed procedure, in particular with respect to conventional NRUS. 

4.1. Resonance tracking NRUS 

The experiment described in the previous section allows to analyse the strain dependence of resonance frequency and damping. The results of NRUS performed using the resonance tracking approach are compared with NRUS performed using monochromatic excitations and chirps. The conventional NRUS measurement, i.e., using a sequence of monochromatic excitations, is performed in a similar way as in resonance tracking mode, in order to allow a meaningful comparison of the results. The set of probing frequencies covers a range of 800 Hz with a step of 5 Hz , each is held for 15 ms with the initial 

10 ms discarded in data acquisition. The frequency sweeps are repeated at amplitudes starting from 0.5 V , going up to 150 V in 60 equal steps (loading) and then decreasing through the same values (unloading). The experimental data are shown in Fig. 1. The chirp NRUS uses a linear chirp signal of a duration of 1 s tapered with a Tukey window. The frequency range as well as the amplitude sequence match the values specified above for sine NRUS. The measurements were taken successively ensuring constant environ-mental and same boundary conditions, though not necessarily initiated in a relaxed state and/or in the same conditioning state. The measurement du-rations differ significantly: resonance tracking is complete within 2.5 s , chirp measurement takes approximately 2 min , and sine NRUS was measured in 

5 min .The resonance frequency and damping are consistently estimated using the MoDaNE inversions for all of the three approaches. In the case of sine NRUS, the measurement with the highest amplitude is used for the estima-tion of the signal amplitude and phase, i.e. the datapoint with a frequency closest to the resonance. The chirp measurements are processed using a dis-crete Fourier transform with a resolution of 2 Hz and again the value with the highest amplitude is used in the MoDaNE inversion. The strain dependence of both resonance frequency and damping ob-tained using the three NRUS approaches are reported in Fig. 7. The curves generally agree with results reported in literature for the loading branch: 19 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 

> δf res  [%]

a) RT (exp. time 2.5 s) chirp (exp. time 2 min) sine (exp. time 5 min)    

> 0123

ε [με]

> 0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00
> δα  [%]

b) Figure 7: Comparison of NRUS results measured using resonance tracking, monochromatic excitations and chirps. a) Relative resonance frequency variation (defined as δf res =(fres − fres ,0) /f res ,0 where fres ,0 is the resonance frequency a the lowest amplitude), b) damping coefficient variation (defined as δα = ( α − α0) /α 0 where α0 is the damping at the lowest amplitude). 

20 an initial quadratic behavior is followed by an approximately linear depen-dence. We observe a good agreement between the methods both in shape and values. On the contrary, the unloading branch is different in the three cases, where the resonance tracking shows larger loop area. The effect is likely due to a different conditioning and relaxation. Being the duration of measurements in resonance tracking much shorter than the other cases, it is expected slightly less conditioning during loading (explaining the small differences in the loading branch) and significantly less relaxation during un-loading (leading to the significantly higher values of velocity and damping variations during unloading in resonance tracking). Notably, the damping still slightly grows even though the strain decreases at the beginning of the unloading. Thanks to the very short acquisition time, resonance tracking allows to explore behaviours which cannot be tracked with standard NRUS methods. 

4.2. Effects of conditioning duration 

The acquisition time can be controlled in resonance tracking and kept minimal, thus making it an optimal technique to study the role of the du-ration of the excitation for what concerns conditioning (and thus also sup-porting the discussion of the previous figures). To this purpose, the same resonance tracking based NRUS measurement was performed using various rates. The duration of the excitation for each amplitude was varied from 6 ms 

to 1 s resulting in measurements performed within Texp = 1 .4 s to 2 min , with the fastest measurement not necessarily performed in the stationary state. The signals acquired for the analysis are always 5 ms long (i.e. just before switching to the following amplitude). The strain dependences of resonance frequency and damping are shown in Fig. 8. The nonlinearity and loading–unloading asymmetry of each curve are quantified by the resonance/damping variation at the strongest excita-tion amplitude and the curve opening (area enclosed by the loading and unloading curve) and their estimated values are shown in Fig. 9. Here, data are shown for two parts of the experiment: in the former, the duration is increased (circles), while in the second it is decreased (triangles). Note the good agreement between the two experiments. We observe that the nonlinear effect (decrease in resonance frequency and increase in damping) during loading becomes stronger with increasing experiment duration (blue to yellow) and the opposite during unloading (Fig. 8). A slower measurement produces more conditioning during loading, but 21 -1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0      

> δf res  [%]
> a) 1.4 s 1.5 s 1.9 s 2.5 s 3.7 s 7.2 s 13.1 s 25.0 s 60.5 s 119.4 s 0123
> ε[με]
> 0.18 0.19 0.20 0.21 0.22
> α [m−1]
> b)

Figure 8: Results obtained using resonance tracking in measurements with various du-rations. a) Relative resonance frequency variation, b) damping coefficient. Color scale represent the total duration of the measurement. 

also more relaxation during unloading, therefore the curves are less open (area decreases). We finally remark that the results of slow measurements do not match those obtained using conventional approaches to NRUS, despite sharing the same duration, as the strain varies during frequency sweep and the average conditioning amplitude is lower. Furthermore, the strain spatial profiles dur-ing measurement vary with frequency in conventional NRUS, while this is not occurring in resonance tracking NRUS implementation. 

4.3. Monitoring of conditioning and relaxation 

The same procedure can be applied to a measurement involving condi-tioning using excitation at constant amplitude and relaxation process. In this case, the temporal evolution of the material parameters is analysed, i.e. slow dynamics is studied. As conventionally done, to estimate the material parameters, we measure the preconditioning and relaxation phases exciting with a monochromatic 22 25 30 35 40       

> Afres  [μHz] a)
> 20 25 30
> Aα
> [Gm −1]b)
> 110 100
> Texp [s]
> 8425 8430 8435
> fres  [Hz]
> c)
> 110 100
> Texp [s]
> 212 215 218
> α [km −1]d)

Figure 9: Results obtained using resonance tracking in measurements with various dura-tions. ab) Areas enclosed by fres (ε) and α (ε) curves vs. measurement duration Texp , cd) resonance frequency and damping measured at the highest excitation amplitude vs. Texp .Squares correspond to measurements obtained performing increasing the experiment dura-tion (data shown in Fig. 8) while triangles from decreasing durations performed just after the previous. Green and orange symbols circles show, for reference, the values obtained with conventional and chirp based NRUS. 

wave at very low drive amplitude ( 0.5 V ). Between them, the sample is excited at large amplitude. The drive amplitude protocol is shown in Fig. 10a (blue). During conditioning and relaxation phases, the resonance frequency evolves in time, even though the drive amplitude is constant, thus the need of resonance tracking. The drive/estimated resonance frequencies are shown versus time in 10c and match well. With respect to the previous experiments, a few modifications were re-quired. The 5 ms signals were recorded almost continuously, i.e. the 10 ms 

pause between successive acquisition was ommitted, since amplitude is con-stant (except at the onset of conditioning and relaxation and frequency varies slowly). This allowed to increase time resolution of early times of both con-ditioning and relaxation processes, reducing the pause before acquisition to a bare minimum given by the equipment latency and processing time. Con-sequently, the sample is always in standing wave conditions, except imme-diately after changing the drive amplitude. We expect significant effects particularly at the very beginning of the relaxation measurement, when the received signal consists predominantly of the exponential decay of the pre-ceeding high-amplitude excitation (ring-down). Thus, the amplitude and phase are not measured reliably and should not be used in the analysis. We adopt an inhibition mechanism that makes the excitation frequency and res-23 9.9 10 .0 10 .101                           

> a) 68 .468 .568 .69.910 .010 .101
> [rad]
> b) 68 .468 .568 .69.910 .010 .18.48.5
> c) 68 .468 .568 .60100 200 300
> t[s]
> 0.00.51.01.5
> |Ytx,rx | [V]  transmitter receiver
> 0100 200 300
> t[s]
> −50
> −25 025 50
> ∆φ [mrad]
> 0100 200 300
> t[s]
> 8.40 8.45 8.50
> f [kHz]
> fres
> f

Figure 10: Conditioning and relaxation experiment. a) Excitation (blue) and measured (orange) amplitude vs. time. The real transmitter voltage is 100 × higher. b) Phase difference vs. time. c) Excitation frequency (red) and resonance frequency estimated using MoDaNE inversion (violet). Zoom of beginning of conditioning and relaxation are shown in the upper row. 

onance tracking parameters fixed for a given number of iterations (2 in our case), i.e. for the first approx. 10 ms following a drop in amplitude, to avoid ring-down influence on both results and effectiveness of resonance tracking. Also note that, due to the constant amplitude excitation, resonance tracking is performed mostly using phase feedback only, while amplitude feedforward contributes only at the onset of conditioning and relaxation. The experimental protocol is illustrated in Fig. 10: after a short ( 10 s )preconditioning phase, the sample is excited at high amplitude (results for 

A = 150 V are shown here) for 60 s (conditioning phase) and the following relaxation process is measured for 1 h . The phase difference (Fig. 10b) remains almost zero during the whole experiment, except for a short time when the amplitude is changed, see the upper row. The different variances correspond to signal-to-noise ratios during conditioning a and low-amplitude excitation. This is a further demonstration of the efficiency of the resonance tracking procedure dealing with an abrupt change in the material parameters. During the ring-up due to conditioning (when the excitation amplitude is increased), the resonance frequency gradually decreases as the strain goes up. The amplitude feedforward is not applied here (assuming the coefficient is still unknown). Consequently, the drive frequency update is "delayed" with respect to the resonance frequency (Fig. 10c) causing a peak in the phase difference that is progressively corrected in time using the phase feedback. The ring-down (very initial steps of relaxation) case is different. The amplitude feedforward is applied here (note the simultaneous increase in drive frequency and drop in amplitude), but the phase feedback cannot be used as 24 0.01 0.10 1.00 10.00 100.00     

> t[s]
> -1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.5 -0.2 0.0
> δf res  [%]
> a)
> 0.1 10.0 1000.0
> t[s]
> -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1
> δf res  [%]
> b)
> 150 V 100 V 50 V Figure 11: Relative resonance frequency variations during a) conditioning, b) relaxation.

the experimental data are contaminated by the ring-down conditioning, as discussed before. As the drive frequency is not updated for a few iterations, the initial spike of the phase difference (Fig. 10b) and of the estimated resonance frequency (Fig. 10c) were expected and meaningless. The measurement described above was performed using several condi-tioning amplitudes. The resonance frequency during both conditioning and relaxation processes (Fig. 11) exhibits a linear evolution in log-time as de-scribed in literature. Results of the resonance tracking procedure, again produce results in agreement with literature observations. 

5. Discussion 

5.1. Consideration on the resonance tracking procedure 

The proposed approach, implementing a discrete-time resonance tracking algorithm, is designed to maintain a dynamical system vibrating with its resonance mode during an experiment involving varying material parameters. Rather than repeatedly sampling a resonance curve, the excitation frequency is iteratively updated so that a prescribed phase condition between excitation and response is satisfied. For each iteration, the system is driven at a selected frequency and am-plitude for a predefined duration, allowing the transient wave to decay. The response is then evaluated, and the phase difference between excitation and response is computed. Based on this phase deviation from the resonance con-dition, the excitation frequency for the next iteration is updated according to a linearized model of the local frequency–phase relation. An analytical 25 model of linear monochromatic standing waves (MoDaNE) is used to adapt the phase–frequency slope based on damping estimate, which is shown to contribute to the efficiency of the procedure even in the nonlinear regime. In this manner, the algorithm performs a feedback correction that converges toward and subsequently tracks the evolving resonance frequency. A feedforward control is implemented in the procedure to predict the changes in the resonance frequency as a response to the varying excitation amplitude due to fast nonlinear effects. However, the material parameters evolve also due to other effects: slow dynamics and possible sample tem-perature increase caused by energy dissipation (as observed in [23]). As the amplitude sequence is constructed using uniform steps and the timing of the iterations is uniform as well, the feedforward control implicitly accounts for these slow effects too, extrapolating the resonance frequency evolution in time. This behaviour is beneficial for the efficiency of the resonance tracking, however, interpreting the coefficient of the feedforward term as a derivative of the amplitude dependence is not fully correct. This effect might be par-tially responsible for the asymmetry in the coefficient ℓ between loading and unloading (Fig. 5i). The proposed algorithm shares conceptual similarities with phase-locked loop (PLL) techniques [65] widely used for resonance tracking in nonlinear dynamical systems. However, the present implementation differs in several key aspects. First, the procedure operates in discrete time, ensuring that the frequency update is based on quasi-stationary conditions. Second, the update rule incorporates a local linearized model with adaptive gain and optional feedforward terms associated with controlled experimental parameters. The method is therefore not formulated as a continuous feedback controller but as an iterative measurement protocol tailored to systems with evolving material properties. 

5.2. Considerations about MoDaNE 

Although the MoDaNE formulation is used throughout this work as a convenient reference model, the proposed resonance tracking method does not rely on the validity of the MoDaNE solution in nonlinear or heterogeneous materials. In particular, the definition of resonance employed here is based solely on the experimentally observed phase response and does not require any assumption of linearity or spatial homogeneity. As demonstrated experimentally (Fig. 1), the resonance frequency de-fined by the zero crossing of the phase remains consistent with the conven-26 tional amplitude-based definition used in sine NRUS, even at elevated ex-citation amplitudes where nonlinear effects and slow dynamics are present. The MoDaNE model is therefore used primarily as a supporting tool rather than as a fundamental assumption underlying the method. Within this framework, the MoDaNE equations serve two practical pur-poses. First, they provide a simple parametrization for correcting linear frequency-dependent distortions of amplitude and phase introduced by the experimental setup. In particular, the linear phase correction inferred from the model was found to accurately match the nominal delay of the vibrome-ter, confirming its instrumental origin. Second, the model offers an estimate of the local slope of the phase– frequency relation near resonance, which is used to update the proportion-ality coefficient in the frequency update step. Importantly, the resonance tracking procedure does not require an accurate estimate of this slope to func-tion correctly; even approximate values lead to stable tracking. The adaptive update merely improves convergence speed and robustness, as demonstrated in Section 3.4. In the MoDaNE formulation, the attenuation coefficient represents purely dissipative losses in a linear, homegeneous medium. In the present experi-ments, however, the estimated attenuation is derived from the amplitude of the fundamental harmonic and therefore reflects all mechanisms that reduce energy at the excitation frequency. As a consequence, the measured atten-uation should be understood as an effective attenuation of the fundamental response, incorporating not only intrinsic dissipation but also energy transfer to higher harmonics and other nonlinear processes. While this quantity does not correspond to a purely dissipative material parameter, it remains a mean-ingful and reproducible indicator of the system’s response and its evolution with excitation amplitude. Also, it is merely an average as an inhomogeneity is induced in the sample by slow dynamics [21]. 

5.3. Benefits of resonance tracking based measurements 

The approach presented here presents two main advantages. Performing a measurement exciting the sample using the resonance frequency only for each excitation amplitude ensures that the spatial distribution of strain re-mains associated with a single dominant mode (first longitudinal mode in the case of this paper). Second, reducing the measurement time to a minimum, allows improving time resolution and reducing the influence of the chosen experimental protocol on the experiment. 27 Probing slightly different modal mixtures at different drive amplitudes when the excitation frequency deviates from resonance, leads to variations in the spatial strain distribution, thus comparing results in different probing conditions. Although the modal distortions are typically small around the resonances, their influence may become non-negligible, particularly in materi-als with slow dynamic effects, where induced heterogeneity would accumulate and affect following probings. Besides issues related to modal distortions, res-onance tracking ensures that when drive amplitude increases/decreases the sample is constantly probed at increasing/decreasing strain. This cannot be guaranteed when the probing frequency f does not always match the res-onance. Oscillations of the probing frequency around the resonance cause decrease/increase in strain even though the drive amplitude is not varied. In materials with slow dynamics that means switching from conditioning to relaxation within the duration of a single experiment. For instance, sampling the whole peaks at a given drive amplitude involves huge variations in the strain applied and also periods during which strain increases/decreases (be-fore/after f = fres ). Avoiding such effects is crucial for reliable/interpretable measurements. Avoiding probing of the whole frequency range for each amplitude al-lows to decrease the time required to complete the measurement by orders of magnitude without losing information about the resonance frequency or damping. Recall that the out-of-resonance datapoints are not used even in conventional measurements, except eventually for the estimation of Q factor from the peak width. The reduction in experimental time is advantageous from several points of view: 

• Recent study [21] indicates that prolonged probing enhances the contri-bution of slow dynamics, thereby increasing protocol dependence. Also the impact of variations of material parameters due to uncontrolled environmental conditions or increasing temperature caused by energy dissipation in the sample increases with the duration of experiments. The influence of the probing time on the results is confirmed from our data (Fig. 8): as the experiment duration increases, the nonlinear ef-fect during loading becomes stronger due to higher contribution of the slow dynamics effects caused by longer excitation, while during the un-loading branch the prolonged measurement on decreasing amplitudes allows the material relax more, in agreement with observations reported elsewhere using the Scaling Subtraction Approach [55]. Consequently, 28 the slowly performed measurements provide a nonlinear response more similar to those obtained using sine and chirp NRUS measurements that are performed with a similar experiment time. 

• The interplay between conditioning (very slow and cumulative) and nonlinearity (fast) effects can be resolved only with a very fast protocol that do not allow conditioning effects to build up. Our data show the largest apparent damping and frequency shifts during loading observed in conventional NRUS (see Fig. 7), because of the longer duration of the experiment, as confirmed by the cumulative conditioning observed with resonance tracking for damping at the beginning of the unloading phase ( α still increases while driving amplitude already decreases), also observed in other fast measurements using DAET [21]. For a correct interpretation of the data it is thus crucial to track whether the material reached or not an equilibrium at each loading step. Likely, different protocols probe slightly different effective states of a nonlinear material, having in mind that overlapping of phases of dominat relaxation or dominant conditioning, as discussed in the previous paragraphs, does not help assessing the actual state of the material. 

• Tracking the evolution of the material parameters close to a significant jump in amplitude requires a temporal resolution in the measurement sufficiently high and at the same time avoids contamination due to temporal variations in strain profile or other features which might occur in the same temporal interval. Resonance tracking seems to be effective also in this direction (see results in Fig. 10) even though the application here still needs to be better evaluated. 

5.4. Other applications 

Although the applications presented in this work focus on nonlinear res-onant ultrasound spectroscopy, the proposed resonance tracking framework is not limited to amplitude-dependent measurements. The method is, in principle, applicable to any experiment in which an externally controlled pa-rameter modifies the resonance frequency, e.g., temperature variations. In such cases, the controlled quantity would not be the excitation amplitude but the prescribed sample temperature, while the resonance tracking algorithm would still adjust the excitation frequency to maintain the prescribed phase condition. 29 Beyond externally controlled parameters, the feedforward component may also incorporate time as an explicit variable if the resonance frequency evolves slowly due to conditioning, aging, or other gradual processes. In such cases, the frequency update extrapolates the recent trend, effectively predicting the expected resonance shift between successive iterations. This approach is particularly advantageous when the resonance frequency drifts monotonically and on time scales longer than the iteration loop. However, the usefulness of time-based feedforward control depends on the signal-to-noise ratio: only fre-quency changes that exceed the noise level between iterations can be reliably extrapolated. The proposed approach represents in our opinion a general strategy for adaptive resonance measurements rather than a method restricted to nonlin-ear amplitude-dependent spectroscopy. 

6. Conclusions 

We have presented a model-assisted discrete-time resonance tracking frame-work that maintains a resonant system at its instantaneous resonance condi-tion using phase-based frequency updates. Unlike conventional sweep-based approaches, the method does not require the acquisition of complete reso-nance curves and therefore reduces the sensitivity to measurement duration, transient buildup, and protocol-dependent cumulative effects. The algorithm includes two key elements: a phase-based definition of resonance with adaptive linear frequency update rule, and an optional feed-forward term that improves efficiency when externally controlled parameters systematically shift the resonance frequency. Application to nonlinear resonant ultrasound spectroscopy demonstrates that resonance tracking yields consistent resonance frequencies and damp-ing estimates while limiting distortions caused by slow dynamic material evolution and mode reshaping. In conditioning–relaxation experiments, the approach enables continuous monitoring of resonance frequency and damping even during low-amplitude probing, providing a unified measurement strat-egy. Although motivated by NRUS, the method is general and applicable to a broad class of resonant systems with evolving parameters. By combining model-informed updates with explicit control of experimental timing, the pro-posed framework offers a robust alternative to sweep-based or purely analog tracking techniques. 30 Acknowledgements 

J. K. and R. Z. acknowledge the financial support provided by the Min-istry of Education, Youth, and Sports of the Czech Republic via the project No. CZ.02.01.01/00/23_020/0008501 (METEX), co-funded by the Euro-pean Union. J. K. and R. Z. are funded by the institutional support through the grant RVO: 61388998. 

Data availability 

The data reported in this study are openly available in Zenodo at doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19604874 [67]. 

References 

[1] P. A. Johnson, P. N. J. Rasolofosaon, Nonlinear elasticity and stress-induced anisotropy in rock, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 101 (1996) 3113–3124. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1029/95JB02880 . doi: 10.1029/95JB02880 .[2] J. Rivière, L. Pimienta, M. Scuderi, T. Candela, P. Shokouhi, J. Fortin, A. Schubnel, C. Marone, P. A. Johnson, Fre-quency, pressure, and strain dependence of nonlinear elasticity in Berea Sandstone, Geophysical Research Letters 43 (2016) 3226– 3236. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10. 1002/2016GL068061 . doi: 10.1002/2016GL068061 .[3] M. C. Remillieux, R. A. Guyer, C. Payan, T. Ulrich, Decoupling Nonclassical Nonlinear Behavior of Elastic Wave Types, Physical Re-view Letters 116 (2016) 115501. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/ 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.115501 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116. 115501 .[4] X. Li, C. Sens-Schönfelder, R. Snieder, Nonlinear elasticity in resonance experiments, Physical Review B 97 (2018) 144301. URL: https://link. aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.144301 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB. 97.144301 .31 [5] M. Bentahar, H. El Aqra, R. El Guerjouma, M. Griffa, M. Scalerandi, Hysteretic elasticity in damaged concrete: Quantitative analysis of slow and fast dynamics, Physical Review B 73 (2006) 014116. URL: 

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.73.014116 . doi: 10. 1103/PhysRevB.73.014116 .[6] C. Payan, T. J. Ulrich, P. Y. Le Bas, T. Saleh, M. Guimaraes, Quantitative linear and nonlinear resonance inspection techniques and analysis for material characterization: Application to concrete thermal damage, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 136 (2014) 537–546. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/136/ 2/537/842582/Quantitative-linear-and-nonlinear-resonance .doi: 10.1121/1.4887451 .[7] M. Dominguez-Bureos, C. Sens-Schönfelder, E. Niederleithinger, C. Hadziioannou, Stress- and Time-dependent Variations of Elas-tic Properties for Integrity Assessment in a Reinforced Concrete Test Bridge, Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation 44 (2025) 115. URL: 

https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10921-025-01257-y . doi: 10. 1007/s10921-025-01257-y .[8] J. Kober, A. Kruisova, M. Scalerandi, Elastic Slow Dynamics in Poly-crystalline Metal Alloys, Applied Sciences 11 (2021) 8631. URL: https: //www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/18/8631 . doi: 10.3390/app11188631 .[9] N. Kamali, N. Tehrani, A. Mostavi, S.-W. Chi, D. Ozevin, J. E. Inda-cochea, Influence of Mesoscale and Macroscale Heterogeneities in Metals on Higher Harmonics Under Plastic Deformation, Journal of Nonde-structive Evaluation 38 (2019) 53. URL: http://link.springer.com/ 10.1007/s10921-019-0593-6 . doi: 10.1007/s10921-019-0593-6 .[10] J. Y. Yoritomo, R. L. Weaver, Slow dynamic nonlinearity in unconsol-idated glass bead packs, Physical Review E 101 (2020) 012901. URL: 

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.101.012901 . doi: 10. 1103/PhysRevE.101.012901 .[11] L. D. Landau, L. P. Pitaevskij, A. M. Kosevich, E. M. Lifšic, Theory of Elasticity: Volume 7, 3rd ed ed., 1986. 32 [12] R. A. Guyer, P. A. Johnson, Nonlinear mesoscopic elasticity: the com-plex behaviour of granular media including rocks and soil, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2009. [13] P. A. Johnson, B. Zinszner, P. N. J. Rasolofosaon, Resonance and elastic nonlinear phenomena in rock, Journal of Geophysi-cal Research: Solid Earth 101 (1996) 11553–11564. URL: https: //agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/96JB00647 .doi: 10.1029/96JB00647 .[14] R. A. Guyer, J. TenCate, P. Johnson, Hysteresis and the Dynamic Elasticity of Consolidated Granular Materials, Physical Review Let-ters 82 (1999) 3280–3283. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevLett.82.3280 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.3280 .[15] L. A. Ostrovsky, P. A. Johnson, Dynamic nonlinear elasticity in geoma-terials, La Rivista del Nuovo Cimento 24 (2001) 1–46. URL: http:// link.springer.com/10.1007/BF03548898 . doi: 10.1007/BF03548898 .[16] J. A. TenCate, T. J. Shankland, Slow dynamics in the nonlinear elastic response of Berea sandstone, Geophysical Research Letters 23 (1996) 3019–3022. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1029/96GL02884 .doi: 10.1029/96GL02884 .[17] J. A. TenCate, Slow Dynamics of Earth Materials: An Experimental Overview, Pure and Applied Geophysics 168 (2011) 2211–2219. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00024-011-0268-4 .doi: 10.1007/s00024-011-0268-4 .[18] M. Scalerandi, M. Bentahar, C. Mechri, Conditioning and elas-tic nonlinearity in concrete: Separation of damping and phase contributions, Construction and Building Materials 161 (2018) 208–220. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/ S0950061817322481 . doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.11.035 .[19] M. Scalerandi, C. Mechri, M. Bentahar, A. Di Bella, A. Gliozzi, M. Tortello, Experimental Evidence of Correlations Between Con-ditioning and Relaxation in Hysteretic Elastic Media, Physical Re-view Applied 12 (2019) 044002. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10. 

33 1103/PhysRevApplied.12.044002 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.12. 044002 .[20] R. L. Weaver, S. Lee, Slow dynamics in a single bead with mechani-cal conditioning and transient heating, Physical Review E 107 (2023) 044902. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.107. 044902 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.107.044902 .[21] J. Kober, M. Scalerandi, M. Tortello, T. J. Ulrich, R. Zeman, The role of fast and slow dynamics in nonlinear resonant ul-trasound spectroscopy of consolidated granular materials, Scien-tific Reports 15 (2025). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ s41598-025-11854-6 . doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-11854-6 .[22] C. Sens-Schönfelder, R. Snieder, X. Li, A Model for Non-linear Elasticity in Rocks Based on Friction of Internal Inter-faces and Contact Aging, Geophysical Journal International (2018). URL: https://academic.oup.com/gji/advance-article/ doi/10.1093/gji/ggy414/5116168 . doi: 10.1093/gji/ggy414 .[23] R. Zeman, J. Kober, M. Scalerandi, Distribution of Time Scales In-duces Slow Dynamics and Elastic Hysteresis in Sandstones: A Model of Non-equilibrium Strain, Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering (2025). URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00603-025-04668-5 . doi: 10.1007/ s00603-025-04668-5 .[24] J. Y. Yoritomo, R. L. Weaver, Slow dynamic nonlinear elastic-ity during and after conditioning, a unified theory and a lock-in probe, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 200 (2025) 106149. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S0022509625001255 . doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2025.106149 .[25] J. Bittner, J. Popovics, Mechanistic diffusion model for slow dynamic behavior in materials, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 150 (2021) 104355. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S0022509621000521 . doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104355 .[26] J. Jin, P. Johnson, P. Shokouhi, An integrated analytical and exper-imental study of contact acoustic nonlinearity at rough interfaces of fatigue cracks, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 135 34 (2020) 103769. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S0022509619305629 . doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2019.103769 .[27] A. V. Lebedev, Slow Time Phenomena in Heterogeneous Materials: from Microscopic Fluctuations to Macroscopic Relaxation, Acousti-cal Physics 69 (2023) 58–73. URL: https://link.springer.com/10. 1134/S1063771022700543 . doi: 10.1134/S1063771022700543 .[28] J.-Y. Kim, L. J. Jacobs, J. Qu, J. W. Littles, Experimen-tal characterization of fatigue damage in a nickel-base super-alloy using nonlinear ultrasonic waves, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 120 (2006) 1266–1273. URL: 

https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/120/3/1266/899881/ Experimental-characterization-of-fatigue-damage-in .doi: 10.1121/1.2221557 .[29] M. Kersemans, I. De Baere, J. Degrieck, K. Van Den Abeele, L. Pyl, F. Zastavnik, H. Sol, W. Van Paepegem, Nondestructive damage assessment in fiber reinforced composites with the pulsed ultra-sonic polar scan, Polymer Testing 34 (2014) 85–96. URL: https: //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0142941814000233 .doi: 10.1016/j.polymertesting.2014.01.001 .[30] M. C. Remillieux, T. J. Ulrich, C. Payan, J. Rivière, C. R. Lake, P. Le Bas, Resonant ultrasound spectroscopy for ma-terials with high damping and samples of arbitrary geometry, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 120 (2015) 4898– 4916. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10. 1002/2015JB011932 . doi: 10.1002/2015JB011932 .[31] P. Guéguen, P. Johnson, P. Roux, Nonlinear dynamics in-duced in a structure by seismic and environmental loading, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 140 (2016) 582–590. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/140/1/582/ 604352/Nonlinear-dynamics-induced-in-a-structure-by . doi: 10. 1121/1.4958990 .[32] J. Jin, J. Rivière, Y. Ohara, P. Shokouhi, Dynamic acousto-elastic re-sponse of single fatigue cracks with different microstructural features: An experimental investigation, Journal of Applied Physics 124 (2018) 35 075303. URL: http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.5036531 .doi: 10.1063/1.5036531 .[33] M. Scalerandi, M. Griffa, P. Antonaci, M. Wyrzykowski, P. Lura, Nonlinear elastic response of thermally damaged consolidated granular media, Journal of Applied Physics 113 (2013) 154902. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jap/article/113/15/154902/ 374188/Nonlinear-elastic-response-of-thermally-damaged .doi: 10.1063/1.4801801 .[34] G. Kim, E. Giannini, N. Klenke, J.-Y. Kim, K. E. Kurtis, L. J. Jacobs, Measuring Alkali-Silica Reaction (ASR) Microscale Dam-age in Large-Scale Concrete Slabs Using Nonlinear Rayleigh Sur-face Waves, Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation 36 (2017) 29. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10921-017-0410-z .doi: 10.1007/s10921-017-0410-z .[35] L. Gao, P. Shokouhi, J. Rivière, Effect of Grain Shape and Rel-ative Humidity on the Nonlinear Elastic Properties of Granular Media, Geophysical Research Letters 50 (2023). URL: https: //agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2023GL103245 .doi: 10.1029/2023GL103245 .[36] M.-L. Chavazas, P. Bromblet, J. Berthonneau, J. Hénin, C. Payan, Impact of relative humidity variations on Carrara marble me-chanical properties investigated by nonlinear resonant ultrasound spectroscopy, Construction and Building Materials 431 (2024) 136529. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/ S0950061824016702 . doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2024.136529 .[37] X. Feng, M. Fehler, D. Burns, S. Brown, T. L. Szabo, Effects of humidity and temperature on the non-linear elasticity of rocks, Geophysical Jour-nal International 231 (2022) 1823–1832. URL: https://academic.oup. com/gji/article/231/3/1823/6652498 . doi: 10.1093/gji/ggac292 .[38] S. Choi, J. Ryu, J.-S. Kim, K.-Y. Jhang, Comparison of Linear and Nonlinear Ultrasonic Parameters in Characterizing Grain Size and Mechanical Properties of 304L Stainless Steel, Metals 9 (2019) 1279. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4701/9/12/1279 . doi: 10. 3390/met9121279 .36 [39] J. Kober, A. Gliozzi, M. Scalerandi, M. Tortello, Material Grain Size Determines Relaxation-Time Distributions in Slow-Dynamics Ex-periments, Physical Review Applied 17 (2022) 014002. URL: https: //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.17.014002 . doi: 10. 1103/PhysRevApplied.17.014002 .[40] G. Renaud, J. Rivière, S. Haupert, P. Laugier, Anisotropy of dynamic acoustoelasticity in limestone, influence of conditioning, and comparison with nonlinear resonance spectroscopy, The Journal of the Acoustical So-ciety of America 133 (2013) 3706–3718. URL: http://asa.scitation. org/doi/10.1121/1.4802909 . doi: 10.1121/1.4802909 .[41] R. Zeman, J. Kober, F. Nistri, M. Scalerandi, Relaxation of Viscoelastic Properties of Sandstones: Hysteresis and Anisotropy, Rock Mechan-ics and Rock Engineering (2024). URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00603-024-03914-6 . doi: 10.1007/s00603-024-03914-6 .[42] K. E.-A. Van Den Abeele, P. A. Johnson, A. Sutin, Non-linear Elastic Wave Spectroscopy (NEWS) Techniques to Dis-cern Material Damage, Part I: Nonlinear Wave Modulation Spectroscopy (NWMS), Research in Nondestructive Evaluation 12 (2000) 17–30. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10. 1080/09349840009409646 . doi: 10.1080/09349840009409646 .[43] C. Hadziioannou, E. Larose, O. Coutant, P. Roux, M. Campillo, Stability of monitoring weak changes in multiply scattering me-dia with ambient noise correlation: Laboratory experiments, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 125 (2009) 3688– 3695. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/125/6/3688/ 787909/Stability-of-monitoring-weak-changes-in-multiply .doi: 10.1121/1.3125345 .[44] C. L. E. Bruno, A. S. Gliozzi, M. Scalerandi, P. Antonaci, Analysis of elastic nonlinearity using the scaling subtraction method, Physical Re-view B 79 (2009) 064108. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevB.79.064108 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.79.064108 .[45] Y. Ohara, Y. Shintaku, S. Horinouchi, M. Ikeuchi, K. Yamanaka, En-hancement of Selectivity in Nonlinear Ultrasonic Imaging of Closed Cracks Using Amplitude Difference Phased Array, Japanese Journal 37 of Applied Physics 51 (2012) 07GB18. URL: https://iopscience. iop.org/article/10.1143/JJAP.51.07GB18 . doi: 10.1143/JJAP.51. 07GB18 .[46] J. Kober, Assessing Porosity in Selective Electron Beam Melt-ing Manufactured Ti–6Al–4V by Nonlinear Impact Modulation Spec-troscopy, Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation (2020) 8. doi: 10.1007/ s10921-020-00731-z .[47] A. J. Croxford, P. D. Wilcox, B. W. Drinkwater, P. B. Nagy, The use of non-collinear mixing for nonlinear ultrasonic detection of plas-ticity and fatigue, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 126 (2009) EL117–EL122. URL: http://asa.scitation.org/doi/10. 1121/1.3231451 . doi: 10.1121/1.3231451 .[48] K. E.-A. Van Den Abeele, J. Carmeliet, J. A. Ten Cate, P. A. Johnson, Nonlinear Elastic Wave Spectroscopy (NEWS) Techniques to Discern Material Damage, Part II: Single-Mode Nonlinear Reso-nance Acoustic Spectroscopy, Research in Nondestructive Evaluation 12 (2000) 31–42. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10. 1080/09349840009409647 . doi: 10.1080/09349840009409647 .[49] M. Lott, M. C. Remillieux, P.-Y. Le Bas, T. J. Ulrich, V. Gar-nier, C. Payan, From local to global measurements of non-classical nonlinear elastic effects in geomaterials, The Jour-nal of the Acoustical Society of America 140 (2016) EL231– EL235. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/140/3/EL231/ 649628/From-local-to-global-measurements-of-nonclassical .doi: 10.1121/1.4962373 .[50] P. R. Geimer, L. Beardslee, T. J. Ulrich, Nonlinear resonant ul-trasound spectroscopy using white-noise excitation, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 154 (2023) A67–A67. URL: 

https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/154/4_supplement/A67/ 2923779/Nonlinear-resonant-ultrasound-spectroscopy-using .doi: 10.1121/10.0022818 .[51] J. F. Gregg, B. E. Anderson, M. C. Remillieux, Electromag-netic excitation technique for nonlinear resonant ultrasound spec-troscopy, NDT & E International 109 (2020) 102181. URL: https: 

38 //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0963869519304116 .doi: 10.1016/j.ndteint.2019.102181 .[52] J. Kober, R. Zeman, J. Krofta, A. S. Gliozzi, M. Scalerandi, Mon-itoring gallium-induced damage in aluminum alloys using nonlin-ear resonant ultrasound spectroscopy, NDT & E International 161 (2026) 103714. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S096386952600085X . doi: 10.1016/j.ndteint.2026.103714 .[53] X. Liu, Z. Dao, J. Zhu, W. Qu, X. Gong, K. Van Den Abeele, L. Ma, Localization of material defects using nonlinear resonant ultrasound spectroscopy under asymmetric boundary conditions, Physics Procedia 3 (2010) 55–61. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S187538921000009X . doi: 10.1016/j.phpro.2010.01.008 .[54] M. Bentahar, C. Mechri, M. Scalerandi, Nonlinear elastic imaging with amplitude and frequency modulated low fre-quency sources, Applied Physics Letters 117 (2020) 084101. URL: https://pubs.aip.org/apl/article/117/8/084101/ 39697/Nonlinear-elastic-imaging-with-amplitude-and .doi: 10.1063/5.0016357 .[55] M. Scalerandi, C. Mechri, M. Bentahar, A. Di Bella, A. Gliozzi, M. Tortello, Role of slow dynamics in fast dynamics ultrasonic measurements, Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 91 (2020) 105452. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier. com/retrieve/pii/S1007570420302823 . doi: 10.1016/j.cnsns.2020. 105452 .[56] S. Lee, R. L. Weaver, Slow dynamic elasticity at short times, Physical Review E 109 (2024) 065002. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10. 1103/PhysRevE.109.065002 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.109.065002 .[57] S. Maier, J.-Y. Kim, M. Forstenhäusler, J. J. Wall, L. J. Ja-cobs, Noncontact nonlinear resonance ultrasound spectroscopy (NRUS) for small metallic specimens, NDT & E International 98 (2018) 37–44. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S0963869517305911 . doi: 10.1016/j.ndteint.2018.04.003 .39 [58] C. Mechri, M. Scalerandi, M. Bentahar, Separation of Damping and Velocity Strain Dependencies using an Ultrasonic Monochromatic Ex-citation, Physical Review Applied 11 (2019) 054050. URL: https: //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.054050 . doi: 10. 1103/PhysRevApplied.11.054050 .[59] A. F. Vakakis (Ed.), Normal Modes and Localization in Non-linear Systems, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2001. URL: 

http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-94-017-2452-4 .doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-2452-4 .[60] S. Peter, R. Riethmüller, R. I. Leine, Tracking of Backbone Curves of Nonlinear Systems Using Phase-Locked-Loops, in: G. Kerschen (Ed.), Nonlinear Dynamics, Volume 1, Springer International Pub-lishing, Cham, 2016, pp. 107–120. URL: http://link.springer.com/ 10.1007/978-3-319-29739-2_11 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-29739-2_ 11 , series Title: Conference Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Mechanics Series. [61] A. H. Nayfeh, D. T. Mook, Nonlinear oscillations, Wiley, New York, 1995. doi: 10.1002/9783527617586 .[62] J. F. Rhoads, S. W. Shaw, K. L. Turner, Nonlinear Dynamics and Its Applications in Micro- and Nanoresonators, in: ASME 2008 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference, Parts A and B, ASMEDC, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, 2008, pp. 1509–1538. URL: 

https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/DSCC/proceedings/ DSCC2008/43352/1509/334042 . doi: 10.1115/DSCC2008-2406 .[63] D. Antonio, D. H. Zanette, D. López, Frequency stabilization in nonlin-ear micromechanical oscillators, Nature Communications 3 (2012) 806. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms1813 . doi: 10.1038/ ncomms1813 .[64] S. Peter, R. I. Leine, Excitation power quantities in phase resonance testing of nonlinear systems with phase-locked-loop ex-citation, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 96 (2017) 139–158. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/ S0888327017302005 . doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2017.04.011 .40 [65] V. Denis, M. Jossic, C. Giraud-Audine, B. Chomette, A. Renault, O. Thomas, Identification of nonlinear modes using phase-locked-loop experimental continuation and normal form, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 106 (2018) 430–452. URL: https: //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0888327018300220 .doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.01.014 .[66] A. Di Bella, A. S. Gliozzi, M. Scalerandi, M. Tortello, Analysis of Elastic Nonlinearity Using Continuous Waves: Validation and Applica-tions, Applied Sciences 9 (2019) 5332. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/ 2076-3417/9/24/5332 . doi: 10.3390/app9245332 .[67] R. Zeman, J. Kober, M. Scalerandi, Data for "Fixed-phase Resonance Tracking for Fast Nonlinear Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy", 2026. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.19604874 .41