Title: 2604.21500v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21500v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:42:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
Design optimization of flux concentrators for magnetic tunnel junctions -based sensors 

Thomas Brun 1,2 , Javier Rial 1, Lucia Risoli 1, Johanna Fischer 1, Philippe Sabon 1, Guillaume Jannet 2,

Mat thieu Kretzschmar 2, Hélène Béa 1,3 ,* , Claire Baraduc 1           

> 1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA ,CNRS, Grenoble INP, SPINTEC, 17, avenue des Martyrs, 38054 G renoble, France
> 2LPC2E, UMR7328 CNRS and Université d’Orléans, 3 avenue de la recherche scientifique, Orléans, France
> 3Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)
> *Corresponding author: Helene.bea@cea.fr

Abstract 

Miniaturized, ultra -sensitive and easily integrable magnetometers are needed for many applications, 

like space exploration or health monitoring. Achieving this goal requires a magnetic sensor with high 

se nsitivity and low noise . High sensitivity (>1000 %/mT) can be obtained by integrating high gain 

permalloy flux concentrators (FC). And reducing the magnetic 1/f noise can be realized by increasing 

the number of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ s) in the air -gap of the FC . However , this is obtained at 

the expense of a wider air -gap and consequently a decrease of the magnetic gain and thus of the 

sensitivity. In this paper, we explore a design optimization scheme in order to find the best trade -off 

between high FC gain and low magnetic noise. To model the gain of the flux concentrator, w e propose 

two complementary approaches ; one is based on finite elements simulations of the FC gain where the 

influence of geometrical parameters of the air -gap is investigate d. Then, in a second step, we propose 

an analytical formula consistent with all our simulations results and based on magnetic reluctance .

Finally, we derive an analytical model of the sensor detectivity from wh ich we can extract the optimal 

sensor design which allows an improvement by three orders of magnitude of the performances 

compared to a single junction. Measuring ultralow magnetic fields (picotesla), required for biomedical applications or for space 

exploration, is challenging. Magnetoresistive se nsors [1,2] are interesting candidates thanks to their 

compacity, low energy consumption and relatively low fabrication costs. Optimizing the detectivity of 

a m agnetic sensor based on tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) can be done by following two 

complementary options: i ) improv ing the sensor sensitivity; ii) reduc ing the noise. Achieving these two 

objectives is not straightforward because there is a direct interplay between the sensitivity of a 

magnetic tunnel junction and its noise [3] . Indeed, the most prominent noise in magnetic tunnel 

junctions is nowadays the noise due to thermal fluctuations of the magnetization , which increases at 

low frequency and is called 1/f magnetic noise [1,4,5] . A given thermal fluctuation of the 

magnetization induces a fluctuation of the resistance th at contributes to the noise , and that is also 

directly proportional to the sensitivity. Keeping in mind this limitation, the problem is nevertheless not 

hopeless: the noise can be reduced by increasing the total magnetic volume , i.e., the size and number 

of junctions. It is also possible to increase the sensor sensitivity by using a flux concentrator (FC) that 

amplifies the magnetic field at the junction site; this gain of sensitivity is obtained without changing 

the junction response, so the magnetic noise remains the same. Hence to aim at the picotesla range 

at low frequency, these sensors have been combined with magnetic FC of various sizes and shapes [5 –

10] that can increase the magnetic field at the sensor location by a factor up to 440 for single 

staged [11] and 520 for double staged FC [10] .

In this paper, we choose to follow these two options simultaneously and estim ate the improvement 

of detectivity that can be obtained by using a flux concentrator and by increasing the number and size 

of junctions. All the junctions must be packed within the air -gap of the flux concentrator , but m ore 

junctions require a wider air -ga p, which in turn results in a reduction of the flux concentrator gain. The 

optimal trade -off must therefore be estimated by modeling. We first modeled the dependence of the 

concentrator gain on its geometry and tried to reproduce the obtained behavior with theory. Then we 

included this information together with the properties of the MTJs in an overall model of the sensor 

detectivity to determine the optimal sensor design. 

We first performed f inite elements simulations of the flux concentrator using Comsol M ultiphysics® 

software in order to compute the depend ence of the concentrator gain as a function of its geometrical 

parameters. The flux -concentrator is made of NiFe with a relative magnetic permeability μr = 1500 and 

a thickness t = 8 μm . The length and width of one arm of the flux concentrator are L = 5 mm and W =

2.3 mm with a wedge lengt h 𝐿 2 of 2 μm (see Fig. 1 .a) .Fig 1: (a) Design of the flux concentrators used in the Comsol Multiphysics® simulations , the thickness 

of the magnetic flux concentrators is 8 μm ; (b) Scheme of the air -gap with MTJs represented as blue 

dis ks. The area s marked by a 1, 2 and 3 are the areas where the magnetic reluctance is computed later 

on .

The flux concentrator gain is calculated as the ratio of the magnetic field in the middle of the air -gap 

with respect to the external magnetic field (1 μT) applied along the x direction . To properly describe 

how the flux concentrator traps the flux lines, a large volume is simulated: the flux -concentrator is 

pla ced in the middle of a large air box. The field inside the simulation boundaries is defined by analogy 

with a n electrical potential, using a Coulombian description as explained in the work of X. Zhang et 

al [12] . The mesh is much finer close to the air -gap and particularly fine inside the air -gap in which 

each element size is between one and two μm. 

Our work aims at optimiz ing the FC design in conjunction with the integration of the magnetic tunnel 

junctions , seeking a balance between the gain achieved by the design of the FC and the total volume 

of MTJs . The varying geometrical parameters of the concentrator are the width 𝑤 and length 𝑙 of its 

air -gap, which will accommodate a certain number N of junctions as illustrated in Fig. 1.b. The “ 𝑎 ” and 

“𝑏 ” parameters shown in Fig. 1.b are spaces linked to lithography restrictions and will be used below 

in the optimization model, together with the number 𝑁 of junctions and the ir optimal diameter 𝑑 .

Since a n increase of the diameter of the MTJs directly results in a wider air -gap between the 

concentrators , we have first studied the variation of the gain for different air -gap widths, with an 

arbitrary fixed length of 200 μm. Figur e 2 shows th is variation along the x-axis (Fig. 2a) and the y-axis 

(Fig. 2b). 

As expected, increasing the gap width drastically reduces the gain. For example, d oubling it from 5 to 

10 μm reduces the gain by almost half ( from 495 to 258 ), and an increase b eyond 15 μm reduces the 

gain below 200. On the other hand, it can be observed (Fig. 2b) that the gain is the same for a junction 

placed at the edge (in y direction) of the air -gap or in its center, as long as it remains within the air -gap . Indeed, d ue to the shape of the concentrator, the field lines are very tightly packed and there are 

no significant gain losses at the edges, while a drastic drop is observed outside the air -gap .

Fig 2: Evolution of the magnetic gain as a function of the air -ga p width 𝑤 for a fixed length 𝑙 of 200 μm :

(a) Measured along the width (x axis) and in the middle of the length , the dashed part corresponds to 

the inside of the flux concentrator ; (b) Measured along the length (y axis) and in the middle of the width. 

The black dashed line s mark the dimension of the air -gap along its length. 

It appears therefore that increasing the magnetic volume of the sensor does not have to be achieved 

solely by increasing the junction diameter, but rather by using more MTJs in the gap, arranged along 

y-axis and interconnected. This approach would prevent an excessive increase of the air -gap width ,

which is detrimental to the gain, as previously observed . Nonetheless, elongation reduces the 

concentration of field lines in the gap, thereby also reducing the gain. Fig. 3 shows a more complete 

view of the variations of the gain with the width and length of the air -gap. In Fig. 3a we observe that 

the gain strongly decreases when the air -gap width increases , following an expected 1/𝑤 law . The 

impact of the air -gap length on the gain is less critical: Fig. 3b shows a gentle decrease of the gain for 

increasing length . Fig . 3.c summarizes the simulated variation in gain as a color map with both 

parameters , clearly highlighti ng the strong dependence on the gap width and a much weaker variation 

with the gap length . We can easily conclude from Fig. 3 that it is more efficient to add MTJs in the 

length of the air -gap compared to the width. Fig 3: Evolution of the magnetic gain as a function of, (a) the air -gap width 𝑤 for three fixed lengths 

and (b) the air -gap length 𝑙 for three fixed widths. The points show the simulated results and the solid 

lines are fits obtained from the reluctance m odel . The colored areas highlight the points in common 

between both plots. Color map s showing the influence of both the wid th and the len gth of the air -gap 

on the gain obtained from the simulation (c) and from the reluctance model (d) .

In order to understand and reproduce the observed behavior of the concentrator gain , we used the 

concept of magnetic reluctance ℛ [12] , which link s the magnetic flux  𝜙  in a magnetic core to the 

current flowing in a coil around it ( 𝑈 = 𝑛𝐼 with 𝑛 the number of spire s and 𝐼 the current in the coil ):

ℛ𝜙  = 𝑈 . Although magnetic reluctance is defined for closed magnetic circuits , in which the magnetic 

flux is conserved, we adapt ed this concept to model the gain of the flux -concentrator. By definition, 

similarly to an electrical resistance, the magnetic reluctance of a magnetic core of length 𝐿 and cross -

section 𝑆 is ℛ = 1 

> 𝜇
> 𝐿
> 𝑆

, where μ = μ0μ𝑟 is the magnetic permeability . In our case, the reluctance of the 

flux -concentrator is the sum of the reluctance of the two magnetic arms and the one of the air -gap 

since reluctances in series add like electrical resistance s. Due to symmetry, calculating the reluctance 

of half the flux -concentrator is enough, the total reluctance being twice larger. The reluctance to be 

calculated is ℛ = ℛ1 + ℛ2 + ℛ3, where ℛ1is the reluctance of the rectangular part of the magnetic 

arm, ℛ2 is the reluctance of the wedge d region and ℛ3 the reluctance of the half air -gap , with the 

notations used in F ig. 1.b. We obtain:               

> ℛ=1
> 𝜇 0𝜇 𝑟
> (𝐿 1
> 𝑊𝑡 )+1
> 𝜇 0𝜇 𝑟
> (∫𝑑𝑥
> 𝑡 (𝑊 −𝑊 −𝑙
> 𝐿 2
> 𝑥 )
> 𝐿 2
> 0
> )+1
> 𝜇 0
> (𝑤
> 2𝑙𝑡 )

After integration, the result is :𝜇 0𝑡  ℛ = 1

𝜇 𝑟 

[𝐿 1

𝑊  + 𝐿 2

𝑊  − 𝑙  ln  (𝑊 

𝑙 )] + 𝑤 

2𝑙 

Since the magnetic flux i n the air -gap is  𝜙  = 𝐵𝑙𝑡 = 𝑈 

> ℛ

, the field in the air -gap is 𝐵 = 𝑈 

> ℛ𝑙𝑡

. Therefore ,

the dimensionless gain 𝐺 is expected to be inversely proportional to ℛ𝑙 .

Finally, we obtain: 

1/𝐺  ∝ 𝑙 

𝑡 𝜇 𝑟 

[𝐿 1

𝑊  + 𝐿 2

𝑊  − 𝑙  ln  (𝑊 

𝑙 )] + 𝑤 

2𝑡 

This formula fits quite well the simulated gain as a function of the gap width . However, it does not fit 

accurately the simulation data as a function of the air -gap length 𝑙 . This should not be entirely 

surprising , since using reluctance in a system with no flux conservation is a little far -stretched. 

However, the simulation data can be fitted by the formula provid ing that the length 𝐿 1 and 𝐿 2 are 

increased by a factor that scales with the air -gap width. We finally obtain ed a formula that fits all our 

sets of data , with no free parameter (except the 𝐺 0 prefac tor set at 130), using the following simple 

modification of the above formula: 

𝐺 (𝑤 , 𝑙 ) = 𝐺 0 

> ℛ𝑚𝑜𝑑 (𝐿 1,𝐿 2,𝑊 ,𝑤 0,𝑊 )
> ℛ𝑚𝑜𝑑 (𝐿 1,𝐿 2,𝑊 ,𝑤 ,𝑙 )

where ℛ𝑚𝑜𝑑 (𝐿 1, 𝐿 2, 𝑊 , 𝑤 , 𝑙 ) = 𝑙 

> 𝑡 𝜇 𝑟

(1 + 𝑤 

> 10

) [𝐿 1 

> 𝑊

+ 𝐿 2 

> 𝑊 −𝑙

ln  (𝑊  

> 𝑙

)] + 𝑤 

> 2𝑡

In Fig. 3.a and b , all fits are performed with this formula, with a fixed (identical) value of the 

𝐺 0 prefactor. The color map of the gain obtained by this reluctance model (Fig. 3d) show very similar 

trends as the one obtained by simulations (Fig. 3c). Even if t he physical meaning of t he modification of 

the reluctance formula has still to be fully understood, this analytic formula appears to be an 

interesting tool for designing flux concentrators and it prove d to be useful for implementing our model 

to optimize the sensor detectivity . Further studies are nevertheless required in order to assess the 

robustness of this formula when geometrical parameters 𝐿 1, 𝐿 2 and 𝑊 are varied. 

Now that we have characterized the dependence of the gain on the concentrator geometrical 

parameters, we can use this information to optimize the overall sensor design. The sensing elements 

to be placed within the air -gap are MTJs of circular shape connected in a serial/parallel configuration 

and placed on one single row (see Fig. 1b). The number 𝑁 of junctions and their diameter 𝑑 are the 

parameters we wish to modify to improve the detectivity . Since t he bottom electrode must be larger 

than the junction disk and the air -gap larger than the bottom electrode , the junction diameter 𝑑 has a 

direct in fluence on the air -gap width. This one must be determined by taking reasonable margin s

related to lithography reposition issues . In the model, we used 𝑤 = 𝑑 + 2𝑏 with a global margin 𝑏 =

3 μm at both sides of the junction disk. The number 𝑁 of junctions will in turn influence the length of 

the air -gap. Etching issues require a minimal spacing of 𝑎 = 1.5 μm between disks. The air -gap minimal 

length is thus 𝑙 = 𝑁𝑑 + (𝑁 − 1)𝑎 = 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 ) − 𝑎 ≈ 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 ).

The detectivity (also called limit of detection) of the sensor is defined as the noise to sensitivity ratio. 

For a variation 𝛿𝐻 of the external magnetic field, the resistance of the MTJ varies by 𝛿𝑅 , so the MTJ 

voltage variation is : 𝛿𝑉 = 𝛿𝑅 𝐼 0 = 𝑑𝑅  

> 𝜇 0𝑑𝐻
> 𝑉 0
> 𝑅

𝜇 0𝛿 𝐻 = 𝑠 0𝑉 0𝜇 0𝛿𝐻 ,

where s 0 is the normalized ohmic sensitivity of the junction (expressed in T.  -1) and V 0 the voltage 

bias . When the junction is placed within the flux concentrator air -gap, the final sensitivity 𝑆 =

𝛿 𝑉 /(𝜇 0𝛿𝐻 ) expressed in V/T is thus equal to 𝐺 𝑠 0𝑉 0 or , with more usual units, to 10 𝐺𝑠 𝑉 0, with 𝐺 the 

flux concentrator gain, 𝑠 the normalized sensitivity (in %/mT , as commonly used in literature [1,13 –

15] ) and 𝑉 0 the voltage bias . The factor 10 comes from unit conversions. On the other hand, t he noise 

of the junction is the sum of the Johnson noise, the shot noise, the electric 1/f noise and the magnetic 1/f noise. Since the latter is the most prominent noise at low frequency in high quality MTJ [1,4,10] ,

we consider only the output noise from magnetic origin whose power spectral density can be written 

as 𝑆 𝑉 = 𝛼 𝐻 𝑉 0 

> 2
> 𝐴𝑓

(in V 2/Hz) , where 𝑓 is the frequency, 𝛼 𝐻 the Hooge parameter and 𝐴 the area of the 

junction. For a sensor with 𝑁 interconnected junctions, 𝐴 = 𝑁 𝜋 𝑑 2 

> 4

. Thus, the sensor detectivity (in 

T/Hz 1/2 ) is: 

𝐷 = √𝑆 𝑉 

𝑆 = √𝛼 𝐻 

√𝐴𝑓 10 𝐺𝑠 = √𝛼 𝐻 

10 𝑠 

2

√𝜋𝑓 

1

𝑑 √𝑁 𝐺 (𝑤 , 𝑙 ) (1)

with 𝑤 = 𝑑 + 2𝑏 and 𝑙 = 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 )

The optimization of the geometrical parameters require s to minimize the function 𝐹 (𝑑 , 𝑁 ) defined as: 

𝐹 (𝑑 , 𝑁 ) = 1

𝑑 √𝑁 𝐺 (𝑑 + 2𝑏 , 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 )) (2)

The total number of junctions is limited by the fact that the length of the junctions’ row must be smaller 

than the width of the flux concentrator i.e., 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 ) ≤ 𝑊 . T his requires that 𝑑 ≤ 𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑁 )

with 𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑁 ) = 𝑊  

> 𝑁

− 𝑎 . Fig. 4 shows a color map of the function 𝐹 (𝑑 , 𝑁 ) as a function of the number 

of junctions 𝑁 and the junction diameter 𝑑 . In this map, the red line shows the maximal value allowed 

for the junction diameter 𝑑 𝑚𝑎𝑥 . Points beyond this line must therefore be discarded. 

Along a horizontal line on this chart, the junction diameter is fixed and the number of junctions 

increases. Thus , the flux -concentrator air -gap width is fixed and only its length increases when the 

number of junctions increases , resulting in a slight redu ction of the FC gain. By contrast, the noise of 

the sensor strongly decreases as 1/√𝑁 . The net result is a larger signal to noise ratio thus a better 

detectivity (low er values of 𝐹 function). 

When considering a vertical line on this chart, the number of junctions is fixed and their diameter 

increases. Therefore, the FC air -gap widens, which strongly reduces its gain. However, the detectivity 

varies like the inverse of the product of the diameter with the gain (see eq. (1)) . To the first order, 𝑑 ∗

𝐺 ∝ 𝑑  

> 𝑤

. S ince 𝑤 = 𝑑 + 2𝑏 , th e function 𝑑  

> 𝑤

increases with 𝑑 (see inset of Fig. 4, plotted for 𝑁 = 44 and 

two fixed values of 𝑙 ). However, when 𝑑 increases, 𝑙 must also increase to accommodate these larger 

junctions . T his results in a non -monotonous dependence of 𝑑 ∗ 𝐺 with 𝑑 : it varies between the two 

dashed lines corresponding to the minimum length 𝑙 0 (for 44 junctions of diameter 5 μm) and 

maximum length of the air -gap (𝑊 ). The position of the maximum of 𝑑 ∗ 𝐺 co rresponds to the highest 

signal to noise ratio, thus the better detectivity. The overall optimum is obtained when this extremum 

is reached for a number of junctions such as the extremum coincides with the maximal diameter 

allowed. 

We observe in Fig. 4 tha t the minimal value of 𝐹 is obtained close to the red line, thus for a rectangular 

flux concentrator without wedge. This result shows that the improvement of the gain due to the wedge 

does not compensate for the reduction of the junction’s number. The minimum value of the function 

F is evaluated at 7.72 10 -5 μm -1 and is obtained for 𝑁 between 160 and 166 and with a junction diameter 

slightly below 13 μm. Fig. 4: Color map of the fu nction 𝐹 ; the red line corresponds to the maximal diameter allowed for the 

row of junctions to fit within the length of the air -gap. Inset: dependence of the product 𝑑 ∗ 𝐺 (𝑤 , 𝑙 ) for 

2 extreme values of 𝑙 : 𝑙 = 𝑙 0 and 𝑙 = 𝑊 (dashed line) and for 𝑙 = 𝑁 (𝑑 + 𝑎 ) (s olid line); the values 

chosen here ar e 𝑙 0 = 286 μ𝑚 and 𝑁 = 44 .

In order to calculate the detectivity from this value, we need the value of √𝛼 𝐻 /(10 𝑠 ) where 𝛼 𝐻 is the 

Hooge factor and 𝑠 the sensitivity. We have previously mentioned that increasing the sensitivity should 

also increase the magnetic noise . Experimentally, this relationship was demonstrated in [3,16] who 

measured the detectivity as a function of the voltage bias o n the junction. Both these studies found 

that the TMR ratio and thus the sensitivity decreased with increasing bias; at the same time, the noise 

was shown to follow the same trend so that the detectivity remain ed constant. 

Table 1. Hooge parameter, sensitivity and √𝛼 𝐻 /(10 𝑠 ) ratio extracted from variou s studies. 

We can estimate the ratio √𝛼 𝐻 /(10 𝑠 ) using the parameters extracted from previous studies . The 

obtained values are shown in Table 1 and range approximately from 1. 10 -6 to 7. 10-6 T.μm. From these ,

let us assume a value √𝛼 𝐻  

> 10 𝑠

= 2. 10 −6 𝑇 . 𝜇𝑚 , which i s reasonably optimistic and corresponds to a Hooge 

factor of 1.6 10 -7 μm² for a junction with a sensitivity of 20%/mT. With this assumption, the detectivity 

at the optimum point would be 55 pT/ √𝐻𝑧 at 10 Hz. This value has to be compared with the detectivity 

reference  𝛼 𝐻 (μm²)  𝑠 (%/𝑚𝑇 ) √𝛼 𝐻 /(10 𝑠 ) (10 -6

T.μm) 

Comment 

[3]  1.10 -7 26  1.2  tRu =0.3 nm 

[3]  1.10 -7 5 6.3  tRu =0 nm 

[13]  4.10 -8 18  1.1 

[16]  8.10 -8 3.7  7.6 of 55 nT/ √𝐻𝑧 for the same MTJ alone without flux -concentrator . Th us, the use of a flux concentrato r

and of a large number of junctions with the optimum design allows to gain 3 orders of magnitude on 

the sensor detectivity. For the optimal design found here, the flux -concentrator is a rectangular FC, 

without wedge, with an air -gap width of about 𝑑 + 2𝑏 = 19 μ𝑚 and a gain of 80. 

To summarize, using finite element simulations and fitting a reluctance model, we modelled the gain 

of the flux concentrator with the air -gap dimensions that welcome a number of series/ parallel 

magnetic tunnel junctions . Our model shows that the better detectivity is obtained for relatively small 

junction s and using a flux co ncentrator with no wedged region. This is explained by a larger reduction 

of noise with the magnetic volume that largely compensates the loss of gain of the FC w hile increasing 

its length. Our reluctance model of the FC gain is very satisfactory with our g eometry and could be 

further adapted to study other FC geometries. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank Claude Cavoit for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the CNES R&T 

program , the ANR -22 -CE42 -0020 project MAROT and by France 2030 government investment plan 

managed by the French National Research Agency under grant reference PEPR SPIN –ADAGE ANR -22 -

EXSP -0006 .

References 

[1] P. P. Freitas, R. Ferreira, and S. Cardoso, Spintronic Sensors, Proc. IEEE 104 , 1894 (2016). 

[2] P. P. Freitas et al., Spintronic platforms for biomedical applications, Lab Chip 12 , 54 6 (2012). 

[3] J. Y. Chen, J. F. Feng, and J. M. D. Coey, Tunable linear magnetoresistance in MgO magnetic 

tunnel junction sensors using two pinned CoFeB electrodes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 , 142407 (2012). 

[4] M. Rasly, T. Nakatani, J. Li, H. Sepehri -Amin, H. Sukegawa, and Y. Sakuraba, Magnetic, 

magnetoresistive and low -frequency noise properties of tunnel magnetoresistance sensor 

devices with amorphous CoFeBTa soft magnetic layers, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54 , 095002 (2021). 

[5] Jiao et al., Various noise reduction techniques of magnetoresistive sensors and their 

applications: A review, Measurement 242 , 116143 (2025). 

[6] P. D. Kulkarni, H. Iwasaki, and T. Nakatani, The Effect of Geometrical Overlap between Giant 

Magnetoresistance Sensor and Magnetic Flux Concentrators: A Novel Comb -Shaped Sensor for 

Improved Sensitivity, Sensors 22 , 9385 (2022). 

[7] S. Cardoso, D. C. Leita o, L. Gameiro, F. Cardoso, R. Ferreira, E. Paz, and P. P. Freitas, Magnetic 

tunnel junction sensors with pTesla sensitivity, Microsyst Technol 20 , 793 (2014). 

[8] J. Hu, M. Ji, W. Qiu, L. Pan, P. Li, J. Peng, Y. Hu, H. Liu, and M. Pan, Double -Gap Magnetic Flux 

Concentrator Design for High -Sensitivity Magnetic Tunnel Junction Sensors, Sensors 19 , 4475 

(2019). 

[9] Z. Marinho, S. Cardoso, R. Chaves, R. Ferreira, L. V. Melo, and P. P. Freitas, Three dimensional 

magnetic flux concentrators with improved efficien cy for magnetoresistive sensors, J. Appl. Phys. 

109 , 07E521 (2011). 

[10] G. He, Y. Zhang, L. Qian, G. Xiao, Q. Zhang, J. C. Santamarina, T. W. Patzek, and X. Zhang, 

PicoTesla magnetic tunneling junction sensors integrated with double staged magnetic flux 

concentrators, Appl. Phys. Lett. 113 , 242401 (2018). 

[11] S. Manceau et al., Large amplification of the sensitivity of symmetric -response magnetic tunnel 

junctions with a high gain flux concentrator, Applied Physics Letters 123 , 082405 (2023). 

[12] X. Zhang , Y. Bi, G. Chen, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Feng, C. Lv, and W. Wang, Influence of size parameters and 

magnetic field intensity upon the amplification characteristics of magnetic flux concentrators, 

AIP Advances 8, 125222 (2018). [13] T. Nakatani, H. Suto, P. D. K ulkarni, H. Iwasaki, and Y. Sakuraba, Tunnel magnetoresistance 

sensors with symmetric resistance -field response and noise properties under AC magnetic field 

modulation, Applied Physics Letters 121 , 192406 (2022). 

[14] M. Pannetier -Lecoeur, L. Parkkonen, N. Sergeeva -Chollet, H. Polovy, C. Fermon, and C. Fowley, 

Magnetocardiography with sensors based on giant magnetoresistance, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98 ,

153705 (2011). 

[15] M. Oogane et al., Sub -pT magnetic field detection by tunnel magneto -resistive sensors, Appl .

Phys. Express 14 , 123002 (2021). 

[16] E. Monteblanco, A. Solignac, C. Chopin, J. Moulin, P. Belliot, N. Belin, P. Campiglio, C. Fermon, 

and M. Pannetier -Lecoeur, Constant TMR Magnetic Field Sensor Detectivity with Bias Voltage ,

arXiv:2103.04750.