Title: Nonlinear backstepping with saturation for low-thrust station-keeping of libration point orbits

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15028v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:15:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
# Nonlinear backstepping with saturation for low-thrust station-keeping of libration point orbits 

António Nunes a, ∗, Sérgio Brás b, Pedro Batista a

> aInstitute for Systems and Robotics, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais 1, 1049-001 , Lisbon, Portugal
> bEuropean Space Agency, Keplerlaan 1, PO Box 299, 2200AG, Noordwijk, The Netherlands

Abstract 

This paper presents a novel nonlinear backstepping control law for contin-uous, low-thrust station-keeping in the Earth-Moon system. Quasi-periodic libration point orbits are targeted under a high-fidelity model of the dynam-ics. Almost global uniform exponential stability guarantees are attained, as shown through Lyapunov’s stability theory. Saturation of the actuators is formally included in the controller design, such that these guarantees hold even in the event of saturation. The relationship between saturation thresh-old, control gains, and deviation is studied and an optimal procedure for gain selection is discussed. The control solution is tested numerically through a Monte Carlo analysis over representative application cases, subject to op-erational errors, constraints, and external perturbations. Station-keeping under actuation saturation is validated considering a conservative threshold for typical electric propulsion systems. 

Keywords: Station-keeping, Nonlinear backstepping, Actuation saturation, Libration point orbits, High-fidelity ephemeris model, Electric propulsion 

1. Introduction 

The interest on the operation of autonomous spacecraft in cislunar space has surged over recent years, following the renovated efforts of international   

> ∗Corresponding author at: Institute for Systems and Robotics, Instituto Superior Téc-nico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
> Email address: antonio.w.nunes@tecnico.ulisboa.pt (António Nunes)
> arXiv:2604.15028v1 [eess.SY] 16 Apr 2026

space agencies, such as NASA and ESA, towards the re-consolidation of an active human presence on the Moon. In particular, the Artemis Program targets manned missions to the lunar surface as soon as 2027, following a 50 year hiatus since the pioneer endeavors of the Apollo program. These initia-tives foment the development of novel spacecraft guidance, navigation, and control systems that are better prepared for the challenges ahead. In regards to control, specifically, the desire to maximize mission span gives impetus to the design of increasingly efficient strategies that match the advancements in state-of-the-art propulsion systems. Historically, most work has concentrated on the station-keeping of peri-odic orbits about the equilibrium points of the Circular Restricted Three-Body Problem (CR3BP) – a well-known first approximation for the motion of spacecraft under the attraction of two massive celestial bodies, assumed to follow fixed circular orbits. Foundational contributions introduce concepts from feedback and linear optimal control [1, 2] and exploit natural dynamical symmetries through Floquet and invariant manifold theories, considering a linearization of the dynamics [3, 4, 5]. A particularly dominant line of re-search in classical literature is devoted to the study of impulsive control tech-niques that consider sudden changes in velocity. These significantly simplify the inclusion of optimization efforts, which is evidently relevant for the max-imization of fuel efficiency and mission lifespan. For example, target-point 

methods [6, 7] compute correction maneuvers through the minimization of a cost function weighting the magnitude of the actuation command with the projected satellite deviations over a number of discrete future instants, also under a linear viewpoint. Such techniques have also been complemented with global search, orbit continuation, and crossing control methods [8, 9, 10], aim-ing to leverage optimal maneuvers with trajectory design by targeting desired conditions several revolutions downstream. Despite the research interest of the aforementioned approaches, the in-sufficient degree of realism provided by the CR3BP for most practical ap-plications means that the use of higher-fidelity models of cislunar dynamics is required. More specifically, it is typically necessary for these models to depict the motion of the celestial bodies through real ephemeris data, earn-ing them the classification of high-fidelity ephemeris models (HFEMs). In addition, these models usually incorporate the gravitational contributions of other celestial bodies besides the two primaries, as well as relevant pertur-bations acting on the spacecraft. Station-keeping under HFEMs has also been tackled, for the most part, through impulsive control techniques that 2stem from those applied to the CR3BP or its derivatives. For this reason, it is common to find target-point [11], multiple-shooting optimization [12, 13], and crossing control [14] strategies in literature. Alternatively, other authors have assessed impulsive approaches anchored on discrete sliding mode con-trol [15], discrete linear quadratic regulation (LQR) [11, 15], Cauchy-Green tensor targeting [16], and the exploitation of stretching directions [17]. However, the demanding control commands requested by discrete solu-tions at each impulse make it imperative to utilize high-trust propulsion systems, typically based on chemical or cold-gas thrusters. Ultimately, such strategies preclude the use of novel electrical propulsion technologies that have shown to be superior in terms of efficiency, albeit limited to commands of relatively low magnitude [18, 19]. To address this concern, recent research has focused on assessing the use of continuous strategies for the station-keeping tasks of future missions. These solutions are also varied and have been applied to both the CR3BP and HFEMs. To this end, some authors have focused on the use of well-established control approaches, such as LQR [20, 21, 22, 13], introducing optimality from a linearization standpoint to reduce computational demands. Robust alternatives consider the use of H2

and H∞ control [23, 24], to maximize disturbance rejection. Nonlinear con-trol has also been implemented, namely through output regulation for for-mation flying [25], backstepping to achieve formal guarantees for stability [26], and nonlinear programming for improved optimality, however requiring the calculation of the system’s Hamiltonian [13]. Linear programming (LP) has been studied as an extension of classic, impulsive multiple-shooting ap-proaches, through the construction of large-scale optimization problems [27]. More recently, other works have sought modern alternatives, such as model predictive control (MPC) [28, 29], to incorporate also physical constraints in the design of the control response, albeit at an increase in computational demands. A survey of continuous (and impulsive) station-keeping strategies, including but not limited to the ones detailed above, is found in [30]. Despite the wide variety of continuous station-keeping techniques in cur-rent literature, achieving a cohesive solution that harmonizes computational simplicity, rigorous formal stability guarantees, and the inclusion of physical constraints remains an open challenge. To this end, this paper proposes a novel approach, based on continuous nonlinear backstepping, that formally incorporates an actuation saturation constraint to adhere to typical physical limitations of electric propulsion systems. To do so, a base formulation with-out saturation is initially presented and almost global uniform exponential 3stability guarantees under HFEM dynamics are formalized. Then, by mod-ifying the base control law, structural conditions on the control gains are derived through Lyapunov’s theory on stability, showing that it is possible to further respect the saturation constraint without a sacrifice to the stability guarantees attained. This strategy goes a step beyond current literature as: 

(i) saturation is formally included in the controller design phase and does not put into question stability guarantees under the full, nonlinear HFEM; and, simultaneously, (ii) computational demands are kept at bay, as optimal gains may be calculated offline and require no on-board optimization efforts. The proposed approach thus provides meaningful improvements to available literature, where saturation is either considered as an a posteriori effect, de-stroying stability guarantees, or requires computationally expensive real-time optimization to be met, for example through LP or MPC approaches. Given their current relevance, we focus the application of the proposed solution to quasi-periodic orbits (QPOs) of the Earth-Moon system, whose dynamics are modeled through an HFEM considering meaningful external perturba-tions acting on the spacecraft. For improved realism, further operational constraints and errors are introduced at the navigation and control levels. The proposed strategy is evaluated through the means of numerical simu-lations over test cases of relevance and compared to other continuous and impulsive strategies from the literature. Moreover, the practical effects of formally including actuation saturation are evaluated, and a procedure for optimal gain and insertion point selection is discussed. The remainder of this work is structured as follows. In Section 2, the CR3BP and HFEM dynamics of the Earth-Moon system are briefly covered, drawing attention to key differences in the types of trajectories that may be found. Section 3 provides the formal derivation of the controller, starting with the base nonlinear backstepping law and its extension considering the inclu-sion of actuation saturation. Stability guarantees are assessed and formalized making recourse of Lyapunov’s theory. The control law is then evaluated nu-merically in Section 4 in three steps. First, the base control law is compared with continuous and impulsive alternatives from literature, considering ob-jective benchmarks subject to a Monte Carlo analysis. Then, its adequacy at rejecting relevant external perturbations is assessed and station-keeping performance is stacked against the unperturbed case. Lastly, the meanders of formally including actuation saturation are discussed in practical terms, offering key insights on the gain decision process and insertion point selec-tion through numerical means. Control under saturation is further validated 4through simulations. Finally, in Section 5, the most meaningful takeaways from this research and the proposed method are summarized, and possible paths for future investigation are discussed. 

2. Dynamics 

As previously detailed, this work deals exclusively with station-keeping under realistic HFEM dynamics, aiming to meet stringent demands of ongo-ing and future missions within cislunar space. Nonetheless, it is meaningful to briefly cover also the CR3BP formulation for its dynamical insights and characteristic scales. These are later used to scale the HFEM model and simplify the representation of the target trajectories in space. Moreover, it is relevant to discuss the differences in the types of solutions that exist in both dynamical models and how they translate from one to another – a key problem that has been discussed extensively in the literature [31]. 

2.1. CR3BP 

Restricted three-body problems (R3BPs) are a subclass of three-body dynamics that consider one of the masses to be negligible in comparison with the other two. In that case, the motion of the two massive bodies, named primaries, may be interpreted as a solution of an isolated two-body problem (2BP) [32]. Of particular relevance is the case where the primaries are assumed to describe circular orbits about their shared barycenter, which gives rise to the CR3BP. This provides a model for spacecraft motion near two celestial bodies that is amply considered in literature for its mathematical simplicity but dynamical complexity and richness. Moreover, it constitutes a reasonable first approximation for most two-body configurations of interest in the Solar System, namely the Earth-Moon, Sun-Earth, or Sun-Jupiter binaries. We briefly introduce the typical CR3BP formulation in order to cover relevant topics that will be of use for the more realistic dynamical model considered in this work. As the bodies are assumed to describe circular or-bits about the shared barycenter, it is common to consider a synodic reference frame that aligns both primaries along the X axis and rotates along Z to match the angular speed along their respective orbits. Finally, Y completes the right-handed reference frame. Moreover, the distance between primaries is usually scaled to unity and their orbital period to 2π, resulting in unit 5angular velocity. Denoting, without loss of generality, the most massive pri-mary with subscript 1 and the other by subscript 2, their masses are usually scaled according to a problem-specific constant μ such that m1 = 1 − μ and 

m2 = μ. For the Earth-Moon system, considered in this work, μ = 0 .01215 .As a result of the aforementioned procedure, the location of the primaries, modeled as point-masses, is fixed in the synodic frame to r1 = ( −μ, 0, 0) 

and r2 = (1 − μ, 0, 0) . In that case, the effective potential that governs the motion of the third point-mass (the spacecraft), whose position we denote by rT (t) = x(t) y(t) z(t), at each instant t, may be established in the synodic reference frame as 

U = x2(t) + y2(t)2 + 1 − μ

∥r − r1∥ + μ

∥r − r2∥, (1) being comprised of a Coriolis acceleration and two gravitational contribu-tions. Note that the positions of the primaries constitute singularities in the dynamics, where U is not defined. Adopting the dot notation to represent derivatives with respect to time, the equations of motion (EoM) of the spacecraft in the synodic reference frame, over the domain of definition of U , become 

˙r(t) = I3v(t),

˙v(t) = Ωv (t) + ∇U (r(t)) , with Ω =



0 2 0

−2 0 00 0 0

 , (2) where vT =  ˙x(t) ˙y(t) ˙z(t) denotes the spacecraft’s velocity, I3 is the 

3 × 3 identity matrix, and ∇U (r(t)) is the gradient of the effective potential in Eq. (1), evaluated at r(t).The CR3BP dynamics in Eq. (2) constitute a prominent example of a chaotic system of differential equations in dynamical systems theory, with small differences in initial conditions leading to vastly different (and most times unpredictable) solutions over time. To this end, a general solution for the CR3BP cannot be found [32]. Still, it is possible to show that these EoM have five equilibrium points, so-called Lagrange or libration points, which are ordered L1 through L5 by effective potential. All of these points lie on the orbital plane of the primaries: the first three along the X axis and the remaining two forming equilateral triangles with the primaries on both sides of said axis. Moreover, given that the dynamics are autonomous (i.e., they do not depend explicitly on time), another classical result is that they admit an 6infinite number of periodic solutions in phase space (position and velocity), as first approached by Poincaré [33]. A subset of these solutions that is of par-ticular relevance is that of periodic orbits that revolve predominantly about one of the Lagrange points, considered optimal candidates for many missions within the Earth-Moon and Earth-Sun systems, for example, due to their placement with respect to the celestial bodies and communications clear-ance. Recent examples of spacecraft taking advantage of such orbits in the aforementioned systems include the James-Webb Space Telescope (JWST) [34], the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration Probe (IMAP) [35], and the Chang’e-4 spacecraft mission [36]. 

2.2. HFEM 

When it comes to the HFEM, it is common to consider the influence of various celestial bodies – beyond the two of the CR3BP. To this end, the dynamics of the spacecraft are typically established in an inertial frame centered at one of the celestial bodies considered. In this work, we select, without loss of generality, j = 1 to be the Earth, such that the dynamics may be established in the well-known J2000 inertial reference frame. Under no external perturbations, and considering the point-mass contribution of P

celestial bodies, the resulting (non-actuated) spacecraft EoM may be written as ˙r(t) = I3v(t),

˙v(t) = −μ1

r(t)

∥r(t)∥3 +

> P

X

> j=2

μj

rj (t) − r(t)

∥rj (t) − r(t)∥3 − rj (t)

∥rj (t)∥3

!

, (3) where μj denotes gravitational parameter of the j-th celestial body and rj is its position in the J2000 inertial frame, such that r1(t) = 0, ∀t. Similarly to the CR3BP, these dynamics are defined over r(t) ∈ R3 \ S (t) and v(t) ∈ R3,where 

S(t) := x ∈ R3 : x = rj (t), j = 1 , . . . , P (4) represents the set of position singularities at time t, i.e. the location of the celestial bodies considered. For the sake of consistency, we consider the dynamics in Eq. (3) to be scaled according to the characteristic length, time, and mass scales of the CR3BP, from Section 2.1. We note that, due to the explicit time-dependence of the celestial bod-ies’ position, rj (t), no change of coordinates can make the HFEM EoM au-tonomous for P > 2. Hence, when compared to the CR3BP, this dynamical 7model has no constants of motion or relevant symmetries, inhibiting the exis-tence of truly periodic solutions. However, it is also the case that the HFEM is often interpreted as a perturbation of the CR3BP [37], such that quasi-periodic trajectories may be found in the vicinity of CR3BP periodic orbits, provided that relevant Hamiltonian structures are preserved [38]. Exceptions may be found in transition-challenging regions of phase space or for periodic orbits close to resonance with the period of the dominant bodies [39, 40] but, for most general purposes, a trajectory equivalent to a periodic orbit from the CR3BP may typically be found in the HFEM. We take advantage of this fact to transition periodic solutions from the CR3BP into QPOs in the HFEM, which serve as target trajectories for station-keeping purposes. To do so, a method developed in previous work is utilized [31]. Given a target trajectory, it is useful to write the dynamics in error form for the purposes of developing a control strategy that ensures accu-rate tracking. In this sense, consider a nominal point in phase space that evolves along the target solution with time, denoted (r∗(t), v∗(t)) , and let 

z1(t) := r(t) − r∗(t) and z2(t) := v(t) − v∗(t) be the position and velocity deviations from this point, respectively. Then, we may write the controlled error dynamics as 

˙z1(t) = z2(t),

˙z2(t) = fa(t, z1(t)) + u(t), (5) where u(t) is a control acceleration and 

fa(t, z1(t)) := 

> P

X

> j=1

μj

rj (t) − r(t)

∥rj (t) − r(t)∥3 − rj (t) − r∗(t)

∥rj (t) − r∗(t)∥3

!

=

> P

X

> j=1

μj

wj (t) − z1(t)

∥wj (t) − z1(t)∥3 − wj (t)

∥wj (t)∥3

!

is the acceleration error induced by the deviation from the target trajectory, with wj (t) := rj (t) − r∗(t). Naturally, the set of singularities previously identified in Eq. (4) is maintained. Conversely, we may define the domain of definition of the vector field of Eq. (5) by (z1(t), z2(t)) ∈ D (t), where 

D(t) := (x, y) ∈ R6 : x̸ = wj (t), j = 1 , . . . , P 

corresponds to the set of all points in phase space of Eq. (3) whose position 

r(t) does not coincide with one of the celestial bodies at time t, rj (t). This 8notation proves useful when establishing the propositions presented in the following section. 

3. Controller Formulation 

In this work, the orbital station-keeping problem under HFEM dynam-ics is tackled through a strategy derived from nonlinear control theory and Lyapunov’s concepts on stability 1. In particular, we resort to the well-known backstepping technique to develop a base control law that ensures uniform exponential stability (UES), in the sense of Lyapunov, of the origin of the dynamics in Eq. (5). By uniform , we mean that these guarantees hold for all t ≥ t0, where t0 ≥ 0 is a given initial instant. Without loss of gener-ality, we assume that time is established relatively to a chosen epoch, such that t0 = 0 . We show that the guarantees provided by the nonlinear control law are almost global , in the sense that they hold for all initial conditions and trajectories, apart from a set of measure zero. Later, the domain of analysis is restricted to allow for the formal inclusion of an actuation satura-tion constraint, without a sacrifice to the exponential nature of the stability guarantees attained over said domain. 

3.1. Base Control Law 

In regards to the base control law, we extend the formulation devised in previous work for low-fidelity models [26] to the HFEM dynamics, clarifying the nature of the stability guarantees attained. This is formalized in the following statement. 

Proposition 3.1. Consider the HFEM dynamics in Eq. (5) . Let r∗(t) ∈

R3 \ S (t) and v∗(t) ∈ R3 denote the position and velocity states of a target trajectory, over time t ≥ 0. Recall that z1(t) = r(t) − r∗(t) and z2(t) = 

v(t)−v∗(t) denote the spacecraft position and velocity deviations, respectively, at each instant. Then, the control law 

u(t) = −(I3 + K2K1)z1(t) − (K1 + K2)z2(t) − fa(t, z1(t)) , (6) 

where K1 and K2 are constant (symmetric) positive definite gain matrices, guarantees almost global uniform exponential stability of the origin of Eq. (5) .

> 1A commendable introduction to these topics is found in [41].

9Proof. We divide the proof into two parts. Firstly, we show that the origin of the controlled system in Eq. (5) is uniformly exponentially stable over the domain of definition, i.e. z(t) ∈ D (t) ⊂ R6. Then, we show that exponential convergence towards the origin holds for almost all trajectories beginning in 

R6. In other words, we show that the set of initial conditions from which trajectories start outside or eventually exit the domain of definition of the vector field have measure zero in R6.The proof for the first statement follows from meeting the conditions of [41, Theorem 4.10]. Namely, it requires the existence of a Lyapunov function 

V (t, z(t)) that satisfies, ∀t ≥ 0 and zT (t) = zT 

> 1

(t) zT 

> 2

(t) ∈ D (t),

a∥z(t)∥γ ≤ V (t, z(t)) ≤ b∥z∥γ and ˙V (t, z(t)) ≤ − c∥z(t)∥γ ,

where a, b, c, and γ are positive constants. As such, consider the time-invariant candidate Lyapunov function 

V (z(t)) = 12zT 

> 1

(t)z1(t) + 12 [z2(t) + K1z1(t)] T [z2(t) + K1z1(t)] = 12zT (t)Xz (t),

(7) where 

X =

I3 + K1K1 K1

K1 I3



= XT .

For K1 ≻ 0, Eq. (7) clearly satisfies V (z(t)) > 0, ∀z(t)̸ = 0, such that 

12λmin (X)∥z(t)∥2 ≤ V (z(t)) ≤ 12λmax (X)∥z(t)∥2, ∀z(t) ∈ R6 ⊃ D (t). (8) For z(t) ∈ D (t), the time-derivative of the candidate Lyapunov function from Eq. (7) may be written as 

˙V (z(t)) = zT 

> 1

(t)z2(t) + [ z2(t) + K1z1(t)] T [K1z2(t) + fa(t, z1(t)) + u(t)] ,

after substitution of the dynamics from Eq. (5). The application of the control law leads to the quadratic form 

˙V (z(t)) = −z1(t)T K1z1(t) − [z2(t) + K1z1(t)] T K2 [z2(t) + K1z1(t)] = −zT (t)Yz (t), (9) 10 where 

Y =

K1 + K1K2K1 K1K2

K2K1 K2



= YT .

Once more, for K1, K2 ≻ 0, Eq. (9) satisfies ˙V (z(t)) < 0, ∀z(t)̸ = 0, such that ˙V (z(t)) ≤ − λmin (Y)∥z(t)∥2, ∀z(t) ∈ D (t). (10) To this end, the Lyapunov function in Eq. (7) verifies the conditions of [41, Theorem 4.10] with the positive constants 

a = 12λmin (X), b = 12λmax (X), c = λmin (Y), and γ = 2 ,

such that the origin of the dynamics in Eq. (5) is a uniformly exponentially stable equilibrium point, by application of the control law in Eq. (6). To prove the second statement, we first note that the conditions at t = 0 

uniquely define a solution over time, assuming it starts and remains within the domain of definition of the dynamics in Eq. (5). Hence, to show that the UES guarantees are almost global, it is sufficient to show that the set of initial conditions where these guarantees fail has measure zero in R6. Given the exponential stability of the flow and the linear nature of the controlled dynamics in Eq. (5), we note that the only exceptions are therefore: (i) initial conditions that coincide exactly with the singularities’ position at t = 0 ; or 

(ii) initial conditions leading to an intersection with any singularity in finite time. Clearly, since D(0) is simply R6 devoid of a finite amount of point singularities in position, the set of initial conditions that coincide with the singularities at t = 0 has measure zero in R6. In regards to the initial conditions that lead to a collision, time-dependence makes the analysis non-trivial. Nonetheless, in Appendix A we show that these also constitute a set of measure zero in R6, proving that the UES guarantees attained are almost global. By restricting the domain of analysis, it is possible to completely avoid the singularities in the dynamics and attain full guarantees of exponential stability over the entirety of said domain, as per the following statement. 

Corollary 3.1 (of Proposition 3.1) . Consider the conditions of Proposi-tion 3.1 and define the open ellipsoid 

E = y ∈ R6 : yT Xy < λ min (X)r2 , with r = min 

> j=1 ,...,P t∈[0 ,t s]

∥wj (t)∥, (11) 11 where ts > 0 is the final instant of analysis. Then, all trajectories beginning at z0 := z(0) ∈ E converge exponentially fast to the origin of Eq. (5) , over 

t ∈ [0 , t s].Proof. Since it has been established that X ≻ 0, one has, by construction, 

yT Xy ≥ λmin (X)∥y∥2, ∀y ∈ R6,

such that 

∥y∥2 ≤ yT Xy 

λmin (X) < r 2, ∀y ∈ E .

The ellipsoid E is thus a subset of the largest open ℓ2 norm-ball, centered at the origin, that excludes the closest singularity over t ∈ [0 , t s]. It is therefore possible to state that E ⊂ D (t), ∀t ∈ [0 , t s]. Moreover, E constitutes a strict sub-level set of the Lyapunov function from Eq. (7), i.e. 

E = {y ∈ R6 : V (y) < 12λmin (X)r2}.

Satisfying the conditions of Proposition 3.1 ensures the time-derivative of the Lyapunov function is negative definite in D(t), ∀t ≥ 0, such that V (z(t)) 

is strictly decreasing for z(t) ∈ E ⊂ D (t). Trajectories starting inside E must thus remain in this sub-level set over t ∈ [0 , t s], i.e. E is (strictly) forward-invariant . Since E excludes all singularities of the dynamics in Eq. (5) over 

t ∈ [0 , t s] and contains the equilibrium point at the origin, trajectories begin-ning inside this set are guaranteed to converge exponentially fast to z = 0

during the time interval under analysis, following Proposition 3.1. We highlight that the constraint in time, t ∈ [0 , t s], in Corollary 3.1 is mostly a formality due to the time-dependence and limited availability of planetary ephemeris data. Given that missions usually have a limited duration, this concern is inconsequential in practical terms. Still, for nearly-repeating trajectories such as QPOs, it may be the case that min j=1 ,...,P ∥wj (t)∥

may be safely bounded for all t ≥ 0, making it possible to formalize UES guarantees. 

3.2. Control Law with Actuation Saturation 

In order to improve the applicability of the proposed station-keeping strat-egy in realistic scenarios, we ponder the introduction of physical constraints to the operation of the actuators. In particular, given that this strategy has 12 been developed with the intent of enabling the use of low-thrust electrical propulsion systems, a logical constraint to be included is that of an actuation saturation threshold. In this paper, we assume that such a constraint restricts the entire control command, such that its magnitude is upper bounded by 

∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat , where usat > 0 is the established saturation threshold – a physical characteristic of the specific propulsion technology employed. In this work, we consider that the original control law is relieved at the level of the linear term, i.e. 

u(t) = −β(t)Kz (t) − fa(t, z1(t)) , with K := 

I3 + K2K1

K1 + K2



, (12) where β(t) ∈ [0 , 1] is chosen such that ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat , ∀t ≥ 0. Evidently, this approach immediately restricts the analysis to saturation thresholds larger than the maximum foreseeable value of ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥, which is acknowledged as a limitation that grants further discussion at a later point. For this reason, the quality of the upper bound for the nonlinear acceleration error plays an important part in this study, as later discussed. Given that, by application of the control law from Eq. (12), the nonlinear term of the EoM in Eq. (5) is eliminated, the resulting dynamics are linear with respect to z(t), i.e. 

˙z(t) = 

 03 I3

−(I3 + K2K1)β(t) −(K1 + K2)β(t)



z(t). (13) Moreover, if the gain matrices are selected as K1 = k1I3 and K2 = k2I3, it is possible to separate the dynamics coordinate-wise into three 2-dimensional systems in the form of 

"

˙z(i)1 (t)˙z(i)2 (t)

#

=

 0 1

−(1 + k1k2)β(t) −(k1 + k2)β(t)

 "

z(i)1 (t)

z(i)2 (t)

#

, (14) where y(i) denotes the i-th entry of y. In this case, verifying stability of the original system from Eq. (13) is equivalent to verifying it for the individual systems along each coordinate. Since β(t) is expected to vary with time to ensure respect for the saturation constraint, the dynamics in Eq. (14) constitute a linear time-varying system (LTV). Hence, despite of its linear nature, the analysis of the system poles is insufficient to infer on the stability of Eqs. (14) and (13). 13 By substitution of the relieved control law from Eq. (12) in the Lyapunov candidate function in Eq. (7), assuming K1 = k1I3 and K2 = k2I3, one gets, after some simplifications, 

˙V (z(t)) = −12zT (t)Uz (t),

where 

U =

 2( k1 + k21 k2)β(t)I3 [( k21 + 2 k1k2 + 1) β(t) − k21 − 1] I3

[( k21 + 2 k1k2 + 1) β(t) − k21 − 1] I3 2 [( k1 + k2)β(t) − k1] I3



is symmetric. For the purposes of ensuring stability, we are interested in evaluating the limit conditions on β(t) that guarantee U is positive definite. In particular, we may exploit the separability of the original system into its independent 2 × 2 constituents. Since each constituent is symmetric, a sufficient condition for positive definiteness is given by Sylvester’s criterion, 

((k1 + k21 k2)β(t) > 0,

4 (k1 + k21 k2)β(t) [( k1 + k2)β(t) − k1] − (k21 + 2 k1k2 + 1) β(t) − k21 − 12 > 0.

The first condition simply restricts β(t) to be a positive value. The second condition further constrains β(t) according to a quadratic expression that, after some simplifications, may be rewritten as 

−(k21 − 1) 2β2(t) + (2 k41 + 4 k1k2 + 2) β(t) − (k21 + 1) 2 > 0. (15) Through simple algebraic steps, one finds that the roots of the left-hand side of Eq. (15) are 



β1,2 = k41 + 2 k1k2 + 1 ± 2p(k1k2 + 1)( k1k2 + k41 )(k21 − 1) 2 , k1̸ = 1 ,β1 = 11 + k2

, k1 = 1 ,

(16) which exist for all k1, k 2 > 0. Given that the quadratic coefficient in Eq. (15) is negative, Sylvester’s criterion is thus satisfied for β1 < β (t) < β 2 whenever 

k1̸ = 1 , assuming β2 > β 1, without loss of generality – i.e. letting β1 identify the negative square-root option. Alternatively, if k1 = 1 , Sylvester’s criterion is satisfied for β(t) > β 1, since the linear coefficient in Eq. (15) is positive. As 14 shown in Appendix B, it is easy to verify that 0 < β 1 < 1 in both cases and that β2 > 1, if k1̸ = 1 . Since we are interested in a relief that lies between 

[0 , 1] , one concludes that a sufficient condition to guarantee stability under the Lyapunov candidate function from Eq. (7) is that βcrit < β (t) ≤ 1, where 

βcrit = β1 identifies the smallest available root from Eq. (16), given k1, k 2.In Fig. 1, the value of βcrit is provided over a region of interest in k1 and k2.The analysis of this figure highlights how, from the point of ensuring stability under the proposed Lyapunov function from Eq. (7), the linear term of the control law may be relieved significantly with an appropriate choice of control gains. Naturally, as the gains themselves alter the control command, it is not necessarily evident that a larger relief translates directly into a decrease of the final command’s magnitude. We leave this discussion for a later point, and formally establish the results obtained as follows, introducing a minimum allowed relief factor, βmin , to avoid the limit condition of β(t) = βcrit .00 2            

> 0.5
> 40
> k1
> βcrit
> k2
> 162
> 1
> 38410 5
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> Figure 1: Critical relief, βcrit , over k1= (0 ,5] and k2= (0 ,10] .

Proposition 3.2. Consider the conditions of Proposition 3.1, but under the relieved control law from Eq. (12) , where K1 = k1I3 and K2 = k2I3, with constant k1, k 2 > 0, and β(t) ≥ βmin , ∀t ≥ 0, where βmin ∈ (βcrit , 1] is a constant and βcrit is the smallest root of Eq. (16) . Then, the application of the relieved control law from Eq. (12) guarantees almost global uniform exponential stability of the origin of the error dynamics in Eq. (5) .Proof. The proof is completely identical to that of Proposition 3.1, changing 15 only Eq. (10) to 

˙V (z(t)) ≤ − 12λmin (U∗)∥z(t)∥2, ∀z(t) ∈ D (t), (17) where U∗ := U|β(t)= βmin , such that c = 12 λmin (U∗). Under the assumptions of Proposition 3.2, one has c > 0 since U∗ ≻ 0, as previously discussed. 

Corollary 3.2 (of Proposition 3.2) . Consider the conditions of Proposi-tion 3.2 and the ellipsoid E, from Eq. (11) . Then, all trajectories beginning at z0 ∈ E converge exponentially fast to the origin of Eq. (5) over t ∈ [0 , t s].Proof. The proof is analogous to that of Corollary 3.1, considering the mod-ifications introduced in Proposition 3.2. Under the guarantees of Proposition 3.2, it is possible to bound the evo-lution of the deviation magnitude through the proposed Lyapunov function. In particular, Eq. (8) may be reorganized to write, at each instant, 

∥z(t)∥2 ≥ 2V (z(t)) 

λmax (X) .

In that case, substitution into Eq. (17) results in 

˙V (z(t)) ≤ − 2θV (z(t)) , where θ = λmin (U∗)2λmax (X), (18) which may be integrated to obtain an upper bound on the Lyapunov function itself with time, i.e. 

V (z(t)) ≤ V (z0)e−2θt .

Recalling the result from Eq. (8), one thus establishes 

12λmin (X)∥z(t)∥2 ≤ V (z(t)) ≤ V (z0)e−2θt ≤ 12λmax (X)∥z0∥2e−2θt ,

which, after reorganizing and applying the square-root to both sides, yields an upper bound for the deviation at each instant, 

∥z(t)∥ ≤ ρ∥z0∥e−θt , where ρ =

s

λmax (X)

λmin (X) . (19) 16 Under the assumption of exponential stability, we move to ensuring that the saturation threshold is such that it is possible to find β(t) ≥ βmin > β crit 

to meet ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat , for all t ≥ 0. This may, at first, seem counter-intuitive, given how usat is typically an established value that depends on the particu-lar actuator system selected, rather than being a design variable. However, since βcrit depends on the control gains selected, ensuring β(t) ≥ βmin > β crit 

is better interpreted as a problem of compatibility between usat , k1, and k2.With this in mind, focusing on the minimum value of usat allows one to sep-arate the stability guarantees from those in terms of saturation. Later, this allows us to formally show that both concerns may be met simultaneously. To proceed, we note that, at each instant, the triangle inequality provides an upper bound for the magnitude of the actuation command, i.e. 

∥u(t)∥ = ∥β(t)Kz (t) + fa(t, z1(t)) ∥ ≤ β∥Kz (t)∥ + ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥.

Thus, in order to satisfy ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat , ∀t ≥ 0, it is sufficient for 

usat ≥ β(t)∥Kz (t)∥ + ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥, ∀t ≥ 0. (20) At this point, recall that β(t) is a design variable and thus, in the limit, one may take β(t) → βmin if need be, without breaking the assumptions necessary for exponential stability provided by Proposition 3.2. This choice evidently provides the most lenient version of Eq. (20), i.e. 

usat ≥ βmin ∥Kz (t)∥ + ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥. (21) Generally, there is no way to predict how exactly the deviation vector will evolve over time, given a set of initial conditions. Nonetheless, the exponen-tial stability guarantees previously attained bound its magnitude according to Eq. (19), given an initial value – which we may assume to be a mission parameter. This is evidently relevant for bounding the contributions that make up the right-hand side of Eq. (21), which is trivial to do for the linear term. Fortunately, it is also possible to find an upper bound for ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥

with respect to ∥z0∥, such that a sufficient condition to meet Eq. (21) is given by 

usat ≥ βmin ℓρ ∥z0∥ + ϕ(∥z0∥), (22) where ℓ := σmax (K) = p(k1 + k2)2 + (1 + k1k2)2 > 1 is the maximum singu-lar value of K and ϕ(∥z0∥) is the upper bound on the acceleration error, i.e. 

∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥. As detailed in Appendix C, ϕ(∥z0∥) is a nonlinear expression 17 in ∥z0∥, which depends on k1, k2, and βmin , but also on the target trajectory. Moreover, its validity assumes that the initial deviation satisfies z0 ∈ B ,where 

B =



x ∈ R6 : ∥x∥ < rρ



, (23) recalling the definition of r from the ellipsoid in Eq. (11). As explored in Appendix C, satisfying z0 ∈ B implies z0 ∈ E , such that exponential conver-gence holds, following Corollary 3.2. Alternatively, given an initial deviation with ∥z0∥ < r , Eq. (23) may be interpreted as a restriction to k1, through ρ.We provide some additional comments on Eq. (22). Firstly, in line with the previous discussion, the saturation threshold should be larger than the upper bound of the nonlinear acceleration error, ϕ(∥z0∥). In fact, we now see that it is further constrained by the linear contribution βmin ℓρ ∥z0∥. Note that both contributions depend on the control gains and, moreover, on βmin ,which up to this point has been interpreted as a design variable, subject only to βmin > β crit , for the purpose of ensuring exponential stability. From the perspective of the linear term, taking βmin as close to βcrit as possible clearly leads to the most lenient choice. However, this would bring the minimum exponential convergence rate, θ, to zero, following Eq. (18). Given that the nonlinear acceleration error bound may benefit from stronger exponential convergence guarantees, as approached in Appendix C, perhaps it is beneficial to consider larger values of βmin . Clearly, it is non-trivial to predict what the best choice for the minimum relief factor is. In fact, this issue may only be fully discussed when particular test cases are analyzed and wj (t), j =1, . . . , P, is precisely known. For this reason, further discussion is diverted to Section 4. For now, the following statement may be presented. 

Proposition 3.3. Consider the conditions of Proposition 3.2 and let 

z0 ∈ B , with B from Eq. (23) , denote the deviation from the target tra-jectory at t = 0 . Then, if usat , k1, and k2 are such that Eq. (22) is met for 

t ∈ [0 , t s], ts > 0, with βmin > β crit , it is possible to choose β(t), ∀t ∈ [0 , t s],

such that the control law from Eq. (12) guarantees, during this time interval: (i) exponentially fast convergence towards the origin of the error dynamics in Eq. (5) ; and (ii) that ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat .Proof. The proof for the first statement follows directly from Corollary 3.2, since z0 ∈ B =⇒ z0 ∈ E , as discussed in Appendix C. Thus, exponential 18 stability is guaranteed over t ∈ [0 , t s] for any relief satisfying β(t) ≥ βmin 

during this time interval, with βmin ∈ (βcrit , 1] . This validates the upper bound on ∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥, also presented in Appendix C. As previously demonstrated, if Eq. (22) is satisfied over t ∈ [0 , t s], the minimum relief factor necessary to meet ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat during this period also satisfies β(t) ≥ βmin . Hence, there is always at least one choice for 

β(t), ∀t ∈ [0 , t s] that ensures ∥u(t)∥ ≤ usat , without a sacrifice to the expo-nential stability guarantees. 

4. Numerical Results 

Having established the formalities of the proposed nonlinear control law, with and without the inclusion of actuation saturation, we move to evaluat-ing its performance under various application scenarios, considering typical operational challenges and external perturbations. To this end, we initially assess the adequacy of the base control law from Eq. (6) at relevant station-keeping tasks, under operational errors and constraints but subject to no external perturbations. Through a Monte Carlo analysis of relevant bench-marks, we compare its performance with continuous and impulsive alterna-tives from the state-of-the art. Then, the effects of external perturbations are evaluated and stacked against the unperturbed baseline. Finally, actua-tion saturation is formally included and the final control law from Eq. (12) is validated numerically, offering insights for the optimal selection of control gains and insertion point. 

4.1. Preliminaries 

The controller will consider the HFEM dynamics in Eq. (5) under the point-mass gravitational influence of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, such that 

P = 3 . To better replicate a real mission, several operational challenges to the navigation and control of the spacecraft are considered. At the initial instant, an orbital insertion error is pondered, such that the spacecraft be-gins its mission with a deviation relative to the target trajectory. This error is defined randomly, considering normal distributions with zero mean and covariance σI,r and σI,v in position and velocity, respectively, along each di-rection. Moreover, we assume that there are random navigation errors that affect the measurement of z1(t) and z2(t), which are also modeled through normal distributions with zero mean and covariance σN,r and σN,v , respec-tively. Similarly, the application of a given control command is considered to 19 have a normally-distributed error with zero mean and covariance σC , defined as a percentage of the total command magnitude. In addition, a minimum threshold to the control command norm, umin , is prescribed to model limita-tions of electrical propulsion systems. For now, no upper saturation threshold is established, as this will be considered later when the control law with ac-tuation saturation is tested. Finally, given typical operational constraints, measurements of the spacecraft’s position and velocity are assumed to be available only once every TM days. Given the measurement interval TM , the on-board computer must prop-agate the dynamics according to its internal model between successive mea-surements. We assume this model operates on the same basis as the con-troller, such that the dynamics are propagated considering only the influence of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, modeled as point-masses. Fig. 2 provides an illustrative example of the predicted and true state evolution for a spacecraft following a given target trajectory, after a large insertion error. At the end of each predicted segment, resulting from the integration of the dynamics by the on-board computer from the last available measurement, the calculated state of the spacecraft is expected to differ from the true state. The main contrib-utors to this discrepancy include the navigation errors superimposed on said measurement, limitations of the dynamical model considered on-board, con-trol errors, and external disturbances. After each measurement interval, the internal spacecraft state is updated via new measurements and the controller acts so as to bring the predicted state closer to the target trajectory. Insertion error Navigation error Target trajectory Real trajectory Predicted segments Real states Measured states 

> Figure 2: Illustrative example of the real and predicted trajectory of a controlled space-craft, subject to operational errors and limitations.

To more objectively evaluate the controller performance, we ponder the 20 analysis of two metrics defined as 

Ev =

Z tf

> ti

∥u(t)∥dt and Ee =

Z tf

> ti

∥u(t)∥2dt, 

which measure the total velocity variation enacted by the actuators and the corresponding energy expenditure, between time instants ti and tf , in physical units. In addition, we establish env ∥z1∥ = max  

> t∈[t′
> i,t f]

∥z1(t)∥ and env ∥z2∥ = max  

> t∈[t′
> i,t f]

∥z2(t)∥

to assess the upper envelopes of the position and velocity deviation, after the initial insertion error has been (sufficiently) corrected – which requires an appropriate choice of t′

> i

. Finally, the maximum control command mag-nitude, max ∥u∥ := max t∈[ti,t f ] ∥u(t)∥, and total actuator idle time 2, Tidle ,are also recorded. Given that the navigation and control errors are defined randomly, all established metrics are evaluated statistically through a Monte Carlo analysis, considering Ns simulations under similar conditions. The true dynamics of the spacecraft are propagated through an 8-th order adaptive step Runge-Kutta-Verner method with absolute and relative toler-ances set to 10 −12 . The exact dynamical model used will depend on whether or not external perturbations are included. For speed, the dynamics consid-ered internally by the on-board computer are propagated through an 8-th order adaptive step Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method with more lenient toler-ances of 10 −8. The simulations carried out in this work were implemented in Python, making recourse of TU Delft’s Astrodynamics Toolbox (Tudat) [42], which provides access to the above mentioned integration schemes and serves as the interface with NASA’s SPICE planetary ephemeris data for the motion of the celestial bodies considered. An open-source implementation of the nonlinear backstepping control law proposed, which may be tested under the application cases to follow, is available at https://github.com/antoniownunes/NL_SK_mwe . The reader is invited to consult this reference for a better understanding of the control solution’s implementation and the interface with the Tudat package. 

4.2. Target Trajectories 

In this work, we restrict the analysis to station-keeping about QPOs in the HFEM. In particular, we consider two trajectories from the Northern  

> 2In this work, the controller is idle whenever the command’s magnitude is below umin .

21 Halo and Lyapunov families of QPOs about the L2 Lagrange point. Namely, they are direct counterparts to equivalent periodic orbits of the CR3BP, cat-aloged in [43], with the approximate orbital periods of 14 .98 and 15 .86 days, respectively. These trajectories are transitioned into the HFEM over 25 rev-olutions, totaling just over 1 year in both cases, starting from the 1st of January, 2025, without loss of generality. To do so, the approach presented in [31] is pursued, considering four patch points per revolution and targeting a relative segment-to-segment continuity tolerance of 10 −12 . The exact QPOs to be targeted reflect the complete dynamical model used when testing the control solution, and thus depend on whether or not external perturbations are considered. Nonetheless, their shape is mostly equivalent between the unperturbed and perturbed test cases, and thus the QPOs designed consid-ering only the point-mass influence of the Earth, Moon, and Sun may be interpreted as a baseline. These are presented in Fig. 3, in the synodic refer-ence frame centered at the Earth-Moon barycenter, that rotates with these bodies and pulsates to fix their positions to the corresponding locations of the CR3BP, previously discussed in Section 2.1. The projections of both QPOs, the transitioned patch points, and the location of the Moon and L2 point are also evidenced. -3                

> -2
> -1
> 0
> 6
> L2
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Z [km]
> #104
> Y[km]
> #105
> X[km]
> #104
> 4
> 4.8
> 24.6
> 04.4
> -24.2
> Moon
> -44
> -63.8
> (a) L2 Northern Halo QPO. -3
> -2
> -1
> 6
> 0L2
> 1
> 2
> 4
> 3
> Z [km]
> #104
> Y[km]
> #105
> X[km]
> #104
> 4.8
> 24.6
> 04.4
> -24.2
> Moon
> -44
> -63.8(b) L2 Lyapunov QPO.

Figure 3: Nominal QPOs in the Earth-Moon synodic reference frame. Designed consider-ing the point-mass influence of the Earth, Moon, and Sun. The Moon is to scale. 

Note that the resulting trajectories are similar to those considered in [20] and [9], respectively. The former considers a continuous LQR implemen-tation, striving for optimality under a linear approximation of the dynam-ics. The latter presents a two-stage impulsive approach based on multiple-22 shooting, intertwining control maneuvers with trajectory design for loose reference following. By considering the QPOs in Fig. 3, it is possible to com-pare the station-keeping performance of the proposed approach with both continuous and impulsive alternatives available in the literature. 

4.3. Base Control Law 

Firstly, the control law with no actuation saturation from Eq. (6) is em-ployed for station-keeping of the QPOs from Fig. 3, so as to evaluate the performance of the base nonlinear backstepping technique. At this point, no external perturbations are considered, such that both the on-board and true dynamics consider only the point-mass influence of the Earth, Moon, and Sun. In regards to the evaluation of the base control law performance at station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO, from Fig. 3a, the various opera-tional errors and constraints previously defined in Section 4.1 were selected in accordance with [20], and are collected in Table 1. In particular, a relatively large insertion error in position is considered, to evaluate the adequacy of the proposed controller at eliminating challenging deviations. 

> Table 1: Operational errors and constraints for the Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO.

Parameter σI,r σI,v σN,r σI,r σC umin TM

Value 100 km 1 cm s −1 1 km 1 cm s −1 2% 0.1 μm s −2 2 days The results of the Monte Carlo trials totaling 100 runs are presented in Table 2, considering the benchmarks previously established, under the choice of ti = 0 and tf = 365 days. The average values and standard deviation of all runs are presented, as denoted by ¯χ and σχ, respectively. The envelope metrics disregard the first 50 days of simulation, i.e. we take t′ 

> i

= 50 days. Later, the adequacy of this selection is confirmed. For further analysis, two sets of trials are conducted, corresponding to the selection of apoapsis and periapsis as the orbital insertion point. The control gains are selected as k1 =0.5 = k2, stemming from a thorough preliminary analysis [26]. A compilation of the system responses resulting from these trials is also presented in Figs. 4a and 4b for runs beginning at apoapsis and periapsis, respectively. These are given in terms of the magnitudes of the position deviation, velocity deviation, and control command, over the first 100 days of simulation. Note that the results obtained will naturally differ for other control gain choices. 23 Table 2: Performance metrics from Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO, considering ti = 0 , t′        

> i= 50 , and tf= 365 days. The base control strategy is employed, taking k1= 0 .5 = k2.

Insertion at apoapsis Insertion at periapsis 

¯χ σχ ¯χ σχ Units 

> k1 = 0 .5 =  k2

Ev 9.7492 1.4101 10.852 1.7565 [m s −1]

Ee 9.5794 7.5280 27.374 24.311 [mm 2 s−3]

env ∥z1∥ 19.942 3.3587 20.371 3.5290 [km] 

env ∥z2∥ 6.9743 1.0458 7.1908 1.3137 [cm s −1]max ∥u∥ 3.5943 1.8429 11.512 6.5257 [μm s −2]

Tidle 50.765 9.9694 50.595 9.8931 [days ]

From the analysis of Table 2, it is possible to conclude that the total velocity variation enacted by the actuators under the proposed base station-keeping strategy is of the same order of magnitude of continuous approaches found in literature, namely the one in [20]. The same can be said regard-ing the controller idle time. As these figures may vary significantly with the gain choice, we make no comments on perceived improvements in terms of the metrics established. In addition, while the remaining values cannot be compared directly, it is reasonable to state that the deviation envelopes and maximum actuation command are within a tolerable threshold, when compared to similar works in literature. Comparison between the results relating to insertion at apoapsis and periapsis reveals, unsurprisingly, that the choice of insertion point yields no significant difference to the final devi-ation envelopes and controller idle time, but may be meaningful in terms of actuation demands. In particular, the maximum requested command mag-nitude is nearly tripled when the spacecraft is inserted at periapsis, which is similarly felt in terms of control energy expenditure, Ee. The effect on the total velocity variation, Ev, is minimal, which we postulate to be a result of dilution over the large time period of analysis. The observation of Fig. 4 reveals that the choice of insertion point also has little effect on the settling time of the response, following the large initial error, and gives confidence to the selection of t′ 

> i

= 50 days for the calculation of the deviation envelopes in Table 2. It is also possible to confirm the overall larger actuation requests to eliminate the insertion error when the spacecraft starts at periapsis, when compared to apoapsis. In fact, the evolution of 24 0 20 40 60 80 100

> Position deviation magnitude
> [km]

100

200

300

400

0 20 40 60 80 100

> Velocity deviation magnitude
> [m s!1]

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Time [days]

0 20 40 60 80 100

> Control command magnitude
> [7m s!2]

0

2

4

6

8(a) Insertion at apoapsis. 0 20 40 60 80 100

> Position deviation magnitude
> [km]

50

100

150

200

250

300

0 20 40 60 80 100

> Velocity deviation magnitude
> [m s!1]

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Time [days]

0 20 40 60 80 100

> Control command magnitude
> [7m s!2]

0

10

20

30 (b) Insertion at periapsis. 

Figure 4: System responses of the Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO, over the first 100 days of simulation, starting at apoapsis and periapsis. The base control strategy is employed, taking k1 = 0 .5 = k2.

25 the control command magnitude also suggests that the region near periapsis is dynamically more challenging, evidenced by the more demanding control efforts that form oscillations in the plots. These oscillations are not in phase between the two sets of trials due to the different insertion point, but match in terms of orbital placement. No meaningful difference is found in regards to the magnitudes of the position and velocity deviations, which reach similar maximum values and follow a similar overall evolution. In both scenarios, a large overshoot in velocity deviation is visible and may be attributed to the particular gain pair selected in this analysis. Still, it is possible to confirm that no simulation diverges, attesting to the capabilities of the proposed controller. In regards to station-keeping about the L2 Lyapunov QPO, from Fig. 3b, the analysis performed in this work considers the insertion error to be ab-sent. Since the adequacy of the proposed strategy at eliminating large devi-ations from the target trajectories has already been analyzed in the previous test case, this choice allows one to isolate the yearly performance metrics of station-keeping about the second QPO. In particular, we aim to compare the proposed solution with a well-established impulsive-based alternative, found in [9]. In this sense, the operational errors and constraints are selected in accordance with the ones considered in said work, which are summarized in Table 3. However, given the absence of information regarding umin , due to the impulsive nature of the approach found in the literature, we recover the value used previously, from Table 2. In addition, we evaluate the control performance for three choices of measurement interval, between the previous case of TM = 2 days and a more challenging value of TM = 8 days. The latter option matches the interval between the impulsive maneuvers of the shooting strategy employed in [9], which are applied twice per revolution. 

> Table 3: Operational errors and constraints for the Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Lyapunov QPO.

Parameter σI,r σI,v σN,r σI,r σC umin TM

Value 0.0 0.0 1 km 1 cm s −1 1% 0.1 μm s −2 2, 4, 8 days Similarly to the previous test case, the period of analysis is taken as 1 year, leading to ti = 0 and tf = 365 days for the time instants considered in the evaluation of the performance metrics. Since the insertion error has been neglected, the deviation envelope benchmarks consider t′ 

> i

= 0 . For the same reason, it is sufficient to perform the simulations for only one insertion point, 26 which is chosen to be apoapsis. The results stemming from the application of the proposed base control law over 100 trials are presented in Table 4, for the different choices of TM considered.              

> Table 4: Performance metrics from Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Lyapunov QPO for different navigation intervals, TM, considering ti= 0 = t′
> iand
> tf= 365 days. The base control strategy is employed, taking k1= 0 .5 = k2, with insertion at apoapsis.

TM = 2 days TM = 4 days TM = 8 days 

¯χ σχ ¯χ σχ ¯χ σχ Units 

Ev 8.9105 0.6805 18.818 1.6036 76.478 10.893 [m s −1]

Ee 5.1157 0.8481 21.643 3.7689 420.95 137.03 [mm 2 s−3]

env ∥z1∥ 26.202 4.7603 56.379 12.470 234.40 56.356 [km] 

env ∥z2∥ 10.363 1.9405 21.515 5.4819 89.733 26.170 [cm s −1]max ∥u∥ 2.2384 0.3933 4.4809 0.9133 20.106 5.7246 [μm s −2]

Tidle 62.030 9.8522 24.874 7.3808 6.7983 3.7609 [days ]

The results in Table 4 highlight the necessity of sufficiently frequent mea-surements to update the prediction of the spacecraft state that is fed to the control law. For TM = 2 days, the results reflect the previous analysis carried out for the L2 Northern QPO on nearly all grounds – control benchmarks see a significant decrease given the absence of a large insertion error, but deviation envelopes and actuator idle time see only slight changes. Even for 

TM = 4 days, around half of the time interval considered in the impulsive ap-proach covered in [9], the results remain acceptable and the yearly velocity cost is on par with the impulsive alternative from literature, without re-quiring any optimization efforts. However, for larger measurement intervals, namely TM = 8 days, the accumulation of navigation, control, and numerical errors translate into a significant increase on all accounts of the control and deviation benchmarks, and a decrease in control idle time – results which may not be meaningfully improved simply through a different gain selection. In such cases, impulsive approaches, which typically optimize a single ma-neuver under more complete dynamical models, take the upper edge. As previously explored, preliminary mission analysis must counterweight this information with the increase in computational demands associated to such an approach, the thrust capabilities of the actuator system employed, and the formal operational guarantees attained. 27 To better interpret the aforementioned results, Fig. 5 presents the corre-sponding system responses for the three sets of trials with different values of TM , which may be discerned by their color. In addition, the overall en-velopes of each plotted quantity, i.e. the maximum value between all runs for a given TM , at each instant of time, are represented as shaded areas of the same color. The results further confirm the adequacy of the proposed strategy when the measurement interval is small, and its inefficacy when measurements are not sufficiently frequent. As previously discussed, this may be attributed to the accumulation of errors in the position and velocity deviation predictions, which are further exacerbated by the control action itself, which works with incorrect spacecraft state predictions – creating a snowball effect that grows worse with time. This shortcoming has previously been observed in the literature for other continuous station-keeping strategies and can be ultimately identified as a drawback of such approaches. Poten-tial improvements may be achieved by considering an on-board propagation model with a higher degree of accuracy. However, preliminary analysis has shown that such improvements are very marginal and that the navigation errors and measurement interval clearly dominate the discrepancy between the predicted and true satellite states, which motivate extra control action. 

4.4. External Perturbation Rejection 

In order to further improve the realism of the application, we ponder the inclusion of external perturbations, to be considered at the level of the true dynamics and trajectory design 3, but not by the on-board controller. In particular, three contributions are considered: (i) spherical harmonics in the gravitational fields of the Earth and Moon; (ii) solar radiation pressure (SRP); and (iii) gravitational perturbations due to the other relevant bodies in the Solar System. In regards to the inclusion of spherical harmonics in the gravitational fields of the Earth and Moon, we ponder the use of an 8th order model – a typical standard considered in literature [44, 45, 46]. For the SRP perturbation, it is necessary to establish additional physical properties of the spacecraft. While this particularizes the analysis presented in this work, it is also the case it may be interpreted as a proof of concept for similar 

> 3In [20], the importance of considering the perturbations when designing the nominal trajectories is underlined. Such efforts avoid unnecessary control action acting against the dynamics. This does not increase the computational cost of the controller, as trajectory design is typically done before deployment, with the highest possible fidelity model.

28 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350                          

> Position deviation magnitude
> [km]
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> TM=2daysTM=4daysTM=8days
> 050100150200250300350
> Velocity deviation magnitude
> [m s!1]
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> Time[days]
> 050100150200250300350
> Control command magnitude
> [7m s!2]
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30

Figure 5: System responses of the Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Lyapunov QPO, over 1 year of simulation, starting at apoapsis. The base control strategy is employed, taking k1 = 0 .5 = k2. Shaded regions discern between simulations considering different measurement intervals, TM .

29 spacecraft and may be easily extended for different configurations. In this work, we assume that the spacecraft has a mass of m = 500 kg , mean area of radiation incidence of A = 10 m 2, and coefficient of reflectivity Cr = 1 .8. The SRP perturbation is calculated with a typical cannonball model, considering possible occlusion due to the Earth and Moon, for improved realism. As for the external body perturbations, only the point-mass contribution of Jupiter is pondered. As will be seen shortly, the remaining bodies of the solar system exert negligible forces on the spacecraft. All perturbing effects are modeled and calculated making recourse of Tudat’s capabilities. For this study, we return to the L2 Northern Halo QPO. In Fig. 6, the magnitude of the aforementioned perturbations over the path of the target trajectory is presented and compared to the point-mass (PM) influences of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, in a logarithmic scale. This serves to illustrate that, for this particular QPO, the spherical harmonics (SH) in the gravita-tional field of the Moon are, by far, the most meaningful perturbation to the dynamics – on par with the point-mass gravitational influence of the Sun. This is followed by the SRP perturbation, around 2 orders of magnitude lower. Note that, for this perturbation’s profile, the discontinuities evidence occlusion with respect to the Earth and/or Moon. Finally, the perturbation stemming from the spherical harmonics in Earth’s gravitational model and the point-mass contribution of Jupiter present near negligible effects. Addi-tional analysis, here omitted, shows that the contributions of the remaining celestial bodies lie below that of Jupiter and are thus negligible, practically speaking. Moreover, we note that the L2 Lyapunov QPO is affected in a sim-ilar manner by the perturbations considered. However, both QPOs occupy a similar region in space and thus the results obtained may differ vastly for other nominal trajectories. To analyze the perturbation rejection capabilities of the base NL control law employed, a Monte Carlo analysis is carried out considering the estab-lished external perturbations, recovering also the operational constraints and errors previously presented in Table 1. The corresponding results, for mis-sions starting at apoapsis and periapsis are represented in Table 5. We note that, once more, all simulations correctly converge towards a region of prox-imity to the target trajectory, obeying, on average, the position and velocity envelopes detailed in the table. The benchmarks obtained highlight that, even under realistic external perturbations, the proposed control law is adequate at eliminating the large insertion error and, moreover, at maintaining the spacecraft in a region of 30 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350        

> Time[days]
> 10!10
> 10!8
> 10!6
> 10!4
> Acceleration [m s!2]
> Nominalaccelerations
> MoonPM
> EarthPM
> SunPM
> Perturbations
> JupiterPM
> SRP
> MoonSH
> EarthSH

Figure 6: Perturbations felt by a spacecraft following the L2 Northern Halo QPO, over 1 year of simulation, compared to nominal accelerations from the point-mass gravitational contributions of the Earth, Moon, and Sun. Table 5: Performance metrics from Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO under external perturbations, considering ti = 0 , t′ 

> i

= 50 , and 

tf = 365 days. The base control strategy is employed, taking k1 = 0 .5 = k2.

Insertion at apoapsis Insertion at periapsis 

¯χ σχ ¯χ σχ Units 

Ev 12.513 1.4244 13.755 1.6947 [m s −1]

Ee 12.987 8.1150 30.123 26.160 [mm 2 s−3]

env ∥z1∥ 23.117 2.6172 23.209 2.9132 [km] 

env ∥z2∥ 7.1769 1.2194 7.1893 1.1387 [cm s −1]max ∥u∥ 4.1748 2.0565 12.552 6.5583 [μm s −2]

Tidle 32.627 7.5591 32.430 5.4897 [days ]

proximity to the target trajectory. To this end, when compared with the results from Table 2, similar deviation envelopes are observed. In terms of actuation, the control effort benchmarks Ev and Ee see a moderate increase of approximately 30% . The actuator idle time sees a decrease of similar magnitude in both sets of trials when compared to the unperturbed analysis. This comparison shows that, when external perturbations are introduced, the controller continues to fulfill the proposed tasks but expends moderately more actuation to do so. Nonetheless, the performance observed is still in line with other continuous strategies from literature considering similarly perturbed application scenarios [20]. 31 4.5. Control Law with Actuation Saturation 

Having established the adequacy of the base NL control law at the station-keeping task about two relevant QPOs in the Earth-Moon system, we move to quantifying the effects of formally including an actuation saturation threshold in the controller design. As previously discussed, the approach pursued in this work relies on the coupling of the controller gains and the saturation threshold to formalize exponential stability guarantees in a region of proximity to the target trajectory. In this sense, we recall that the initial deviation from the target orbit must belong to the set B from Eq. (23), which depends on the evolution of the target trajectory itself, namely on its closest approach to the celestial bodies considered over the time frame of analysis. As the target trajectories considered in this work are QPOs, we assume that, for a sufficiently large period of simulation, the number of revolutions that make up the nominal solutions are enough to fully capture their spread in space. For this reason, while the formal guarantees hold only over the time-domain of study, we argue that they may easily be extended for longer periods of time, should a mission require so. As previously mentioned, the selection of the control gains must be per-formed harmoniously with the value of the actuation saturation threshold. To better illustrate the coupling between parameters, we study the minimum saturation threshold, usat,min , that respects Eq. (22) tightly, given k1 and k2.We focus this analysis on the L2 Northern Halo QPO and an established expected value for the initial deviation, derived from the operational errors from Table 1. More specifically, we take ∥z0∥ ≈ 1 × 10 −3 as a conservative guess which corresponds to the 99 .9% quantile of the insertion error, as de-termined through statistical analysis. Naturally, as the controller operates subject to operational constraints and errors, there are no formal guarantees on the magnitude of the deviation when new measurements are available and the deviation is updated. This could seemingly put into question the balance between control gains and saturation threshold that was carefully tuned with the expected deviation at insertion. We later discuss possible solutions to this problem but, for now, it is assumed that the insertion error constitutes the maximum deviation from the target orbit. Considering the established value for ∥z0∥, the maximum ρ for which z0 ∈ B is satisfied imposes k1 < 10 .775 .As such, we limit our analysis to the conservative figure of k1 ≤ 10 .We recall that a meaningful decision in regards to the calculation of 

usat,min , from Eq. (22), lies in the minimum allowed relief factor, subject to 

βmin > β crit for each k1 and k2. In order to evaluate the effect of this param-32 eter, we ponder its definition according to an auxiliary parameter, η ∈ (0 , 1] ,such that 

βmin = βcrit + η(1 − βcrit ).

In this way, η = 0 identifies the critical condition, where the exponential nature of the stability guarantees is lost, as the minimum exponential rate of convergence formally goes to zero – asymptotic stability is, nonetheless, maintained. Contrarily, increasing η ensures the minimum rate of conver-gence is larger, at the expense of allowing less relief to the control command. In the limit, for η = 1 , the relieved control law from Eq. (12) returns to its base form, in Eq. (6). In Fig. 7, the level curves for the ratio usat,min /∥z0∥ are provided, for in-creasing choices of η, considering insertion at apoapsis. The results obtained are unique to the L2 Northern Halo QPO and the start epoch and time pe-riod of analysis selected, which are recalled from previous sections. As such, they may differ greatly for other target trajectories. Still, further analysis shows that changes in start epoch and time-period do not yield significantly different results. As previously discussed, the last plot, for η = 1 , may be in-terpreted as a baseline – it corresponds to the total application of the original backstepping control law from Eq. (6) and, thus, the level curves constitute the maximum expected actuation command of the base controller, under the exponential stability guarantees that it provides. On the contrary, the plot for η = 0 represents the limit case where the relief to the original control law is free to reach the maximum theoretical limit for exponential stability. One immediate conclusion from the observation of Fig. 7 is that, for small k2 and large k1, all plots approach the same profile, irrespective of 

η – ultimately, ρ explodes and the linear term completely dominates the minimum saturation threshold in Eq. (22). A similar observation is made regarding small k2 and small k1, however due to the elimination of the linear contribution of the control command – cases where the minimum saturation threshold is dictated by the nonlinear acceleration term. On the contrary, for moderate choices of k1, it is possible to observe that η plays an important role by balancing the opposing nature of the relief tolerance and convergence rate. By direct comparison between the plots for η = 1 and η = 0 , it is possible to see that, while the overall minimum value of usat,min is slightly higher for the latter, the region where it remains lower than 100 ∥z0∥, for example, is significantly increased. This means that, generally speaking, for the same saturation threshold, the introduction of a relief factor to the 33 53                        

> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 6060
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:0
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:1
> 52
> 53
> 53
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:5
> 51
> 52
> 52
> 53
> 53
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 7575
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=1:0

Figure 7: Level curves for the minimum saturation threshold usat,min  

> ∥z0∥

, for the L2 Northern Halo QPO and ∥z0∥ ≈ 1 × 10 −3, considering insertion at apoapsis. 

control law may provide more lenience in the selection of the control gains. While this is not indicative of a faster response (because, even if larger gains are allowed, the control command is being relieved, after all), it does suggest a larger margin for response shaping through gain selection. Conversely, it might be the case that, for a given gain pair, it is only possible to respect a saturation threshold if a relief to the control law is considered – see, for example, how k2 = 100 allows only for usat > 100 ∥z0∥ when η = 1 , but as low as usat = 60 ∥z0∥ when η = 0 . As the figure suggests, perhaps a choice of η

between the limit values of 0 and 1 may be better suited, since it provides a balance between the benefits stemming from a larger relief, as in η = 0 , and of a faster convergence rate, for η = 1 . Clearly, the optimal choice of η for each gain pair is generally not evident. We return attention to this matter shortly. In a similar fashion, Fig. 8 presents the curve levels for the same function, but considering insertion at periapsis. Once more, the results provided are valid only for the L2 Northern Halo QPO, the selected start epoch, and time period considered. We start by highlighting that, in the case of η = 0 ,the level curves obtained are exactly the same as the previous case from Fig. 7, considering insertion at apoapsis. This is because, when the maximum relief is allowed, the minimum guaranteed rate of convergence goes to zero (the exponential nature of the stability guarantees is lost), such that the nonlinear term that bounds the acceleration error in Eq. (22) is irrespective 34 of the insertion point – this is further discussed in Appendix C. Similarly, the conclusions previously drawn for very large and very small values of k1 also hold in the case of trajectories starting at periapsis. As for the differences between the two cases, we observe from the analysis of the η = 1 plot that the benefits stemming from a faster convergence rate, previously important for decreasing usat,min over moderate choices of k1, are no longer significant when beginning at periapsis. This is a mere consequence of starting in a region where the nonlinear acceleration error is at a maximum. For this reason, from the perspective of the saturation threshold, there is no benefit for increasing 

η when starting at periapsis, as η = 0 provides the optimal usat,min regions. Operational considerations may require a faster convergence speed and thus mandate the selection of a larger value for η, but this is considered to be outside of the scope of this work. 53                        

> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 6565
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:0
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:1
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=0:5
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 200
> 1000 1000
> 1000
> 1000
> 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 2=1:0

Figure 8: Level curves for the minimum saturation threshold usat,min  

> ∥z0∥

, for the L2 Northern Halo QPO and ∥z0∥ ≈ 1 × 10 −3, considering insertion at periapsis. 

The conclusions drawn from the study of Figs. 7 and 8 may thus be summarized as follows: when possible, selecting insertion at apoapsis pro-vides access to the more lenient saturation thresholds for the same control gains. Conversely, given a saturation threshold, insertion at apoapsis en-sures that the gain selection may be made from a larger pool of options, with 

η → 0 leading to the broadest pool. However, slightly increasing η may prove beneficial to access desirable gain configurations by taking advantage of the faster minimum convergence rate. On the contrary, if insertion at periapsis is 35 mandatory, optimal conditions are always reached for the maximum possible relief, i.e. taking η → 0.Given that η is, in principle, a design choice, perhaps it is relevant to opti-mize its value for each gain pair (k1, k 2), namely with the intent of minimizing 

usat,min . Keeping the aforementioned considerations in mind, we perform this analysis only for insertion at apoapsis. For optimization purposes, we make recourse of the nonlinear least-squares routine provided by MATLAB’s Op-timization Toolbox [47]. The level curves resulting from this procedure are presented in Fig. 9. In addition, Figs. 10a and 10b present the corresponding contour plots of the optimal η and βmin values, respectively. 51    

> 51
> 52
> 52
> 52
> 53
> 53
> 53
> 53
> 53
> 55
> 55
> 55
> 55
> 5555
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 60
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 65
> 100
> 100
> 100
> 200
> 200
> 1000
> 1000
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 75
> 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 10!1
> 100
> 101
> 102
> 103
> k2

Figure 9: Level curves of the optimal minimum actuation saturation threshold usat,min  

> ∥z0∥

, for the L2 Northern Halo QPO and ∥z0∥ ≈ 1 × 10 −3, considering insertion at apoapsis. The highlighted level curve corresponds to a value of usat,min ≈ 0.1 N for a 500 kg spacecraft. 

For a given saturation threshold, Fig. 9 may be used to retrieve optimal gain pairs that ensure usat is respected without a sacrifice to the exponential stability guarantees, even if the controller saturates. In this work, we con-sider the saturation value to be 0.1 N – a conservative figure in comparison with typical limits of hall-effect and ion based electric propulsion systems [18, 19] and the values typically considered in the literature for similar works [48, 20, 49]. Given the mass of the spacecraft detailed in Section 4.4, this threshold roughly corresponds to usat ≈ 75 ∥z0∥, in non-dimensional units. In that case, the control gains may be selected from the region delimited by the level curve highlighted in Fig. 9 and the corresponding actuation relief limit from Fig. 10b. We highlight the degree of conservatism of the proposed implementation as, for example, the choice of k1 = 0 .5 = k2 – previously considered in the analysis of the base control law, in Fig. 4a – lies inside the 36 10!3 10!2 10!1 100 101        

> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0(a) Optimal ηfactor. 10!310!210!1100101
> k1
> 100
> 102
> k2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0(b) Maximum relief, βmin .

Figure 10: Optimal η factor and maximum relief, βmin leading to the results in Fig. 9, for the L2 Northern Halo QPO and ∥z0∥ ≈ 1 × 10 −3, considering insertion at apoapsis. The highlighted curve corresponds to the conditions yielding usat,min ≈ 0.1 N , for a 500 kg 

spacecraft. 

specified region but the control command never reaches the saturation thresh-old. In fact, this is verified for most choices of (k1, k 2) inside the established region. Still, we argue that the formal projection of a minimum saturation threshold benefits from the proposed analysis since significant reliefs may be obtained for various choices of the gains, as illustrated in Fig. 10b. This offers a decrease in terms of usat,min when compared to a naive analysis that simply bounds the expected actuation command magnitude with no further considerations, which would lead to the level curves previously obtained for 

η = 1 .0.While it has been established that the previous results for k1 = 0 .5 = k2

already formally respect the aforementioned saturation constraint, it is still relevant to search for illustrative scenarios where saturation is actually ob-served. For this purpose, we select another control gain pair from the limit condition identified by the usat,min = 75 ∥z0∥ level curve from Fig. 9. In par-ticular, the pair (k1, k 2) = (0 .6962 , 300) is selected. While not offering the best possible choice in terms of response adequacy or speed, the large value of k2 is sure to lead to the occurrence of actuation saturation, where the controller adequacy may be evaluated. Once more, a Monte Carlo analysis totaling 100 runs is carried out considering the operational constraints and errors from Table 1, the external perturbations detailed in Section 4.4 and, moreover, the established saturation threshold of usat ≈ 0.1 N – equivalent to 2 × 10 −4 m s −1 for the 500 kg spacecraft considered. The corresponding system responses are plotted in Fig. 11, for the first 50 days of simulation, with a detailed zoom on the control profile over the first hour. Note that, 37 given the error superimposed on the control profile, the actual saturation threshold may differ slightly between each run. 0 10 20 30 40 50                 

> Position deviation magnitude
> [km]
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 01020304050
> Control command magnitude
> [mm s!2]
> 0
> 0.05
> 0.1
> 0.15
> 0.2
> Time[days]
> 01020304050
> Velocity deviation magnitude
> [mm s!1]
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Time[days]
> 00.010.020.030.04
> Control command magnitude
> [mm s!2]
> 0
> 0.05
> 0.1
> 0.15
> 0.2usat

Figure 11: System responses of the Monte Carlo analysis of station-keeping about the L2 Northern Halo QPO under external perturbations, over the first 50 days of simulation, starting at apoapsis. The control law with saturation is employed, taking k1 = 0 .6962 and 

k2 = 300 , considering a saturation threshold of usat = 2 × 10 −4 m s −1.

The results presented in Fig. 11 bring confirmation to the respect for the actuation saturation constraint, without a sacrifice to the convergence towards the nominal trajectory – in fact, the large insertion error appears to be corrected equally as fast as the previous results from Fig. 4a. Given that the control gains have been chosen purposefully to force the occurrence of saturation, each new measurement leads to a pronounced increase in con-trol command, manifested in the form of spikes on the ∥u∥ plot. Still, the observation of the detailed zoom on the first hour of simulation shows that the largest spike, at insertion, respects the saturation constraint (up to the actuation error of 2% ) and that some of the trials do actually saturate. Fur-ther analysis on the total deviation with time also shows that its magnitude is largest at insertion, confirming that the proposed gain choice yields a con-servative envelope on the exponential stability and saturation guarantees, that thus hold for every segment of the orbit. Future work should assess if it is beneficial to recompute new control gains as new measurements become available, in hopes of optimizing the control response taking advantage of the initially decreasing deviation from the target trajectory. 38 5. Conclusions 

This work proposes a nonlinear control law for station-keeping about libration point QPOs of the Earth-Moon system, stemming from the ap-plication of a backstepping technique. The base control law is shown to yield almost global guarantees for UES under a realistic, high-fidelity model of the dynamics. By pursuing a continuous strategy, as opposed to classic impulsive-based alternatives, the use of highly-efficient emerging technolo-gies in terms of electric propulsion is made possible. A relief to the linear contributions of the base control law is pondered in order to formally ad-here to a saturation constraint, improving applicability to these low-thrust systems. The improved formulation is shown to uphold exponential stability guarantees even in the event of saturation, under mild assumptions on the magnitude of the deviation. Numerical simulations are carried out to validate the adequacy of the base control solution at tracking two different QPOs, considering different operational constraints and errors, as well as relevant external perturba-tions. Moreover, its performance is compared with other continuous and impulsive alternatives from literature, through a Monte Carlo analysis of various benchmarks in control expenditure, deviation envelope, and control idle time. This study attests to the quality of the proposed solution, which is able to achieve a performance that is on par with its continuous peers, even those actively striving for optimization. In this regard, the proposed strategy provides benefits in terms of computational efficiency. The ramifications of the formal inclusion of saturation constraint are nu-merically studied for an L2 Northern Halo QPO, namely through the analysis of the theoretical lower bound on the saturation threshold with varying con-trol gains. In particular, the maximum relief for exponential stability and insertion location are carefully analyzed. It is found that insertion at apoapsis provides the broadest and most adequate control gain pool, for each satura-tion threshold. Moreover, the best choice of maximum allowed relief is found to heavily depend on the specific gain pair selected, leveraging convergence speed with the time-dependence of the nonlinear acceleration error bound. To this end, the relief at each gain pair is numerically optimized so as to minimize the corresponding lower bound on the saturation threshold. By considering a conservative saturation value from literature on electric space propulsion systems, an illustrative example considering a gain pair resulting from these optimization efforts is further assessed through simulations. Sat-39 uration is observed when answering a large insertion error, though without a sacrifice to the convergence capabilities of the proposed approach. Future work should assess taking into account actuator performance in the established benchmarks to better reflect differences between high- and low-thrust options and expose key differences with classic impulsive station-keeping strategies. In regards to control under saturation, it is relevant to as-sess the definition of the control gains at each new measurement, to take even further advantage of the time-dependence of the proposed analysis. More-over, given that thrust in space is essentially based on mass transfer, it would be relevant to assess a more complete propulsion model that considers mass depletion over time, which is expected to introduce relevant, non-negligible variations in thrust magnitude. Finally, different approaches to relieve the original backstepping control law should be evaluated, namely considering the attenuation of the nonlinear acceleration term or separate adjustments to the position and velocity deviation terms of the linear contribution. 

Appendix A. Sparsity of Colliding Trajectories 

In the proof of Proposition 3.1, it is stated that the set of initial conditions leading to a collision in finite time with any celestial body – a singularity in the error dynamics in Eq. (5) – constitutes a set of measure zero in R6 . In this section, we provide a formal proof for this statement. Under the nonlinear control law from Eq. (6), the HFEM error dynamics in Eq. (5) become 

˙z1(t) = z2(t),

˙z2(t) = −(I3 + K2K1)z1(t) − (K1 + K2)z2(t), (A.1) over z(t) ∈ D (t). For fixed gains, the system is linear time-invariant and its response, from the initial conditions z0, obeys 

z(t) = Φ(t, 0) z0, (A.2) where Φ(t, 0) denotes the state-transition matrix (STM) of Eq. (A.1), be-tween time 0 and t. As such, we may define the collision set , i.e. the set of initial states that lead to a collision in finite time, as 

C =

n

z0 ∈ R6 | ∃ t ≥ 0, ∃j ∈ { 1, . . . , P }, such that [Φ(t, 0) z0](1:3) = wj (t)

o

,

40 where x(1:3) denotes the first three entries of x, such that z1(t) = [ Φ(t, 0) z0](1:3) ,following Eq. (A.2). We thus want to show that C has measure zero in R6.We assume that each celestial body moves smoothly in configuration space and remains sufficiently far from each other. Moreover, the target trajectory is assumed to be collision-free, i.e. that it also remains sufficiently far from every celestial body. In that case, for each j = 1 , . . . , P , define the map 

ψj : Sj → R6, ψj (x, t ) = Φ−1(t, 0) x = Φ(0 , t )x,

where 

Sj = (x, t ) ∈ R6 × [0 , ∞) : x(1:3) = wj (t)

denotes the set of all state-time pairs whose position coincides with the j-th singularity at time t. In that case, we may take advantage of the properties of the STM to map all state-time pairs identifying a collision, encoded in each Sj , towards their respective initial conditions at t = 0 . In other words, the collision set may be written compactly as 

C =

> P

[

> j=1

ψj (Sj ). (A.3) Clearly, each Sj is a C1 manifold of dimension m = 4 in R6 × [0 , ∞), as it represents a smooth surface in velocity and time, under the position con-straint. Moreover, the map ψj is also C1, given the smooth and continuous nature of the linear dynamics in Eq. (A.1) and the invertibility of the STM, by definition [50, Property 4.10]. Following [51, Corollary 6.11], the image of a C1 map f : M → N between manifolds M and N with respective dimensions m and n, satisfying m < n ,has measure zero in N . As such, each image ψj (Sj ) has measure zero in R6.Given that a countable union of measure zero sets also satisfies this property [51, Proposition C.18], the collision set in Eq. (A.3) has measure zero in R6,q.e.d. 

Appendix B. Addendum on the Critical Relief Factor 

When analyzing the stability guarantees provided by the relieved control law from Eq. (12), through the Lyapunov candidate function in Eq. (7), Sylvester’s criterion is invoked, considering K1 = k1I3 and K2 = k2I3, with 41 k1, k 2 > 0. It is found that the relief factor, β(t), must be positive and satisfy a set of conditions that may be written compactly as 

β1 < β (t) < β 2, ∀t ≥ 0,

where 

(β1, β 2) = 

A − BC , A + BC



, k1̸ = 1 ,

 11 + k2

, ∞



, k1 = 1 ,

with 

A = k41 + 2 k1k2 + 1 , B = 2 

q

(k1k2 + 1)( k1k2 + k41 ), and C = ( k21 − 1) 2.

Clearly, A, B, C > 0, for all k1, k 2 > 0.The discussion in Section 3.2 relies on the assumption that 0 < β 1 < 1

and β2 > 1, for all k1, k 2 > 0. This is trivial to verify in the case of k1 = 1 .For k1̸ = 1 , observe that 

A − C = 2 k1k2 + 2 k21 > 0 = ⇒ A > C, (B.1) such that β2 > 1 is immediately satisfied, since B > 0. Moreover, given that 

A > 0 is also satisfied, one has 

A2 − B2 = ( k41 − 1) 2 > 0 = ⇒ A > B, 

which leads to the conclusion that β1 > 0. Finally, Eq. (B.1) ensures 

A − C > 0, such that 

B2 − (A − C)2 = 4 k1k2(k21 − 1) 2 > 0 = ⇒ B > A − C =⇒ C > A − B, 

leading to β1 < 1. We therefore have 0 < β 1 < 1 and β2 > 0 for all k1, k 2 > 0,q.e.d. 

Appendix C. Acceleration Error Bound 

As discussed in Section 3.2, it is necessary to bound the deviation-induced acceleration error in the dynamics of Eq. (5) in order to derive analytical con-ditions for the respect of an actuation saturation constraint. In this section, 42 we develop a nonlinear bounding expression for this contribution, with re-spect to the initial deviation magnitude, aiming for low conservatism. We do so by first exploiting key facts regarding ℓ1 and ℓ2 norms, namely by noticing 

∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥ ≤ ∥ fa(t, z1(t)) ∥1 =

> P

X

> j=1

μj

wj (t) − z1(t)

∥wj (t) − z1(t)∥3 − wj (t)

∥wj (t)∥3

> 1

≤

> P

X

> j=1

μj

z1(t)

∥wj (t) − z1(t)∥3

> 1

+ wj (t)

∥wj (t) − z1(t)∥3 − wj (t)

∥wj (t)∥3

> 1

!

,

where ∥x∥1 denotes the ℓ1 norm of x. Doing so evidences that the magnitude of the acceleration error satisfies 

∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥ ≤ 

> P

X

> j=1

μj



∥z1(t)∥1gj (z1(t)) + ∥wj (t)∥1hj (z1(t)) 



, (C.1) where 

gj (z1(t)) := 1

∥wj (t) − z1(t)∥3 , z1(t)̸ = wj (t)

and 

hj (z1(t)) := gj (z1(t)) − 1

∥wj (t)∥3 , z1(t)̸ = wj (t), wj (t)̸ = 0.

In that case, attention shifts to bounding each gj and hj functions. Naturally, given the nature of hj , it is necessary for the target trajectory to be collision free, i.e. wj (t)̸ = 0, j = 1 , . . . , P , over the time domain of analysis, which is assumed to be the case. Moreover, both functions require z1(t)̸ = wj (t),j = 1 , . . . , P , to be satisfied during that period. In this work, we enforce this condition by restricting the analysis to a region of proximity to the nominal trajectory, i.e. ∥z1(t)∥ ≤ δ < ∥wj (t)∥, where δ is a design parameter to be detailed shortly. Through the triangle inequality, this means that 

∥wj (t)∥ − δ ≤ ∥ wj (t) − z1(t)∥ ≤ ∥ wj (t)∥ + δ. 

Under these conditions, it is clear that 

1(∥wj (t)∥ + δ)3 ≤ gj (z1(t)) ≤ 1(∥wj (t)∥ − δ)3 . (C.2) 43 Moreover, one may also write 

hj (z1(t)) = max gj (z1(t)) − 1

∥wj (t)∥3 , 1

∥wj (t)∥3 − gj (z1(t)) 

!

≤ max 1(∥wj (t)∥ − δ)3 − 1

∥wj (t)∥3 , 1

∥wj (t)∥3 − 1(∥wj (t)∥ + δ)3

!

.

Since f (x) := x−3 is a convex function over x > 0, any secant between two points a, b > 0 lives above the function’s curve. In particular, for a = x − y

and b = x + y, with x > y > 0, the middle point along the secant obeys 

f (x + y) + f (x − y)2 ≥ f (x) = ⇒ 1(x − y)3 − 1

x3 ≥ 1

x3 − 1(x + y)3 .

In that case, since ∥wj (t)∥ > δ > 0, one has 

1(∥wj (t)∥ − δ)3 − 1

∥wj (t)∥3 ≥ 1

∥wj (t)∥3 − 1(∥wj (t)∥ + δ)3 ,

such that 

hj (z1(t)) ≤ 1(∥wj (t)∥ − δ)3 − 1

∥wj (t)∥3 . (C.3) Evidently, the least conservative upper bounds in Eqs. (C.2) and (C.3) are obtained for the lowest choice of δ. If the conditions of Corollary 3.2 hold, recall that the exponential stability guarantees provide an upper bound on the magnitude of the total deviation vector, according to Eq. (19), over 

t ∈ [0 , t s], where ts > 0 is the final simulation time. Therefore, to ensure 

δ ≥ ∥ z1(t)∥ is satisfied over the period of analysis, the best choice for δ is, at each instant, 

∥z1(t)∥ ≤ ∥ z(t)∥ ≤ ρ∥z0∥e−θt ⇝ δ = ρ∥z0∥e−θt , (C.4) where ρ =

qλmax (X) 

> λmin (X)

, recalling the matrix X from the definition of the Lya-punov function in Eq. (7), and θ is the minimum exponential convergence rate. In that case, for δ < ∥wj (t)∥ to hold over t ∈ [0 , t s], a sufficient condi-tion to be met by the initial deviation is to belong to the open ℓ2 norm-ball 

B = x ∈ R6 : ρ∥x∥ < r , with r = min 

> j=1 ,...,P t∈[0 ,t s]

∥wj (t)∥. (C.5) 44 In fact, since zT 

> 0

Xz 0 ≤ λmax (X)∥z0∥2 holds for X ≻ 0, one verifies that 

z0 ∈ B =⇒ zT 

> 0

Xz 0 < λ max (X) r2

ρ2 = λmin (X)r2 =⇒ z0 ∈ E ,

such that the conditions of Corollary 3.2 are indeed satisfied. As such, any trajectory beginning at z0 ∈ B is sure to evolve exponentially fast towards 

z = 0, validating Eq. (C.4). Moreover, while Eq. (C.5) acts to restrict ∥z0∥,it may also be interpreted as a restriction to the control gain k1 instead, through ρ, given an initial deviation ∥z0∥. In that case, ∥z0∥ < r must still be satisfied, i.e. r must be sufficiently large. In practice, this means that the target trajectory must remain sufficiently far away from every celestial body, which usually represents only a mild assumption that is satisfied by most QPOs. For z0 ∈ B , substitution of Eqs. (C.2), (C.3), and (C.4) into Eq. (C.1) leads to a final bound on the acceleration error in the form of 

∥fa(t, z1(t)) ∥ ≤ ϕ(∥z0∥) := max 

> t∈[0 ,t s]
> P

X

> j=1

μj ψj (∥z0∥, t ), ∀t ∈ [0 , t s], (C.6) with 

ψj (∥z0∥, t ) = ∥wj (t)∥1

(∥wj (t)∥ − ρ∥z0∥e−θt )3 − ∥wj (t)∥1

∥wj (t)∥3 +

√3ρ∥z0∥e−θt 

(∥wj (t)∥ − ρ∥z0∥e−θt )3 ,

where Cauchy-Schwarz inequality was used to write 

∥z1(t)∥1 ≤ √3∥z1(t)∥ ≤ √3∥z(t)∥ ≤ √3ρ∥z0∥e−θt .

This need not be done for ∥wj (t)∥1 since it is precisely known for a given target trajectory, depending solely on the motion of the celestial bodies con-sidered, which may be retrieved through their corresponding ephemeris. In that case, the value of Eq. (C.6) may be promptly determined through nu-merical means for a given initial deviation magnitude and choice of k1, k2,and βmin , which define ρ and θ.We draw attention to a key fact about Eq. (C.6) and its relation with the minimum rate of convergence, θ, specifically when tracking QPOs. Due to the nearly-repeating nature of these solutions, it is oftentimes the case that orbital insertion may be pondered at different locations along the trajectory, 45 namely apoapsis or periapsis with respect to the closest celestial body. This has direct consequences at the level of each wj (t), namely changing their re-spective initial value, which in turn alters the behavior of ψj and the bound of the nonlinear acceleration error. In the limit case where θ = 0 , it becomes clear that the insertion point is irrelevant, given how time-dependence is lost for every ψj . In that case, the closest approach to the nearest celestial body (or bodies) is expected to dominate ϕ(∥z0∥). However, if θ̸ = 0 , it may be the case that a careful selection of the insertion point benefits ϕ(∥z0∥) by exploiting the time-dependence stemming from the exponential convergence guarantees. As an example, if the contribution due to the closest celestial body dominates Eq. (C.6), insertion at apoapsis with respect to that body may prove ideal, as convergence towards the target orbit is expected to de-crease the corresponding ψj contribution before the next periapsis passing. To illustrate the aforementioned considerations, consider a simple (non-realistic) example where P = 1 and w1(t) satisfies 

∥w1(t)∥1 = ∥w1(t)∥ = 1 + 0 .1 cos( t + α). (C.7) In a way, changing α is equivalent to selecting the insertion point along a periodic trajectory, with α = 0 identifying apoapsis and α = π periapsis. In that case, Fig. C.12 provides the evolution of ψ1(t) over the equivalent of 5 revolutions, for α = 0 in Fig. C.12a and α = π in Fig. C.12b, under different minimum convergence rates, θ, considering μ1 = 1 , ρ = 1 , and ∥z0∥ = 0 .1.t                            

> 02π4π6π8π10 π
> ψ1(t)
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> θ= 0 .0θ= 0 .1θ= 0 .2θ= 1 .0
> (a) Insertion at apoapsis ( α= 0 ). t
> 02π4π6π8π10 π
> ψ1(t)
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> θ= 0 .0θ= 0 .1θ= 0 .2θ= 1 .0(b) Insertion at periapsis ( α=π).

Figure C.12: Simple example of nonlinear acceleration error bound for a single contribution 

w1(t), satisfying Eq. (C.7), with μ1 = 1 = ρ and ∥z0∥ = 0 .1, for various values of minimum rate of convergence, θ.

From the analysis of Fig. C.12, it becomes evident that the rate of con-vergence is only of significance if insertion is performed at a point where ψ1 is reduced which, in this simple scenario, corresponds to apoapsis. In that case, 46 it is possible to observe that even a relatively small exponential decay rate is sufficient to meaningfully decrease the maximum value of ψ1(t) achieved. For the test case presented, taking θ = 0 .2 is already sufficient to minimize 

ϕ = max t μ1ψ1(t), with larger values of θ yielding no further benefits. More realistic application scenarios are sure to introduce complexity and variety in 

ψj (t). Still, it is oftentimes the case that a single celestial body (typically, the closest) dominates Eq. (C.6), such that the insights provided by this simple example prove to be of broader relevance, as explored in Section 4.5. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by LARSyS FCT funding (DOI: 10.54499/LA/P/0083/2020, 10.54499/UIDP/50009/2020, and 10.54499/UIDB/50009/2020), and by NEURASPACE Project, Contract No. 9, under Regulation (EU) 2021/241 of the European Parliament and of the Council of February 12, 2021 and the Portuguese Recovery and Resilience Program (PRR), in component 05-Capitalization and Business Innovation, under Notice No. 425 01/C05-i01/2021 of the Regulation of Mobilizing Agen-das/Alliances for re-industrialization. 

References 

[1] R. W. Farquhar, The Control and Use of Libration-point Satellites, Technical report, NASA (1970). [2] J. Breakwell, A. Kamel, M. Ratner, Station-keeping for a translunar communication station, Celestial Mechanics 10 (1974) 357–373. [3] W. Wiesel, W. Shelton, Modal control of an unstable periodic orbit, Journal of the Astronautical Sciences 31 (1983) 63–76. [4] C. Simó, G. Goméz, J. Llibre, R. Martinez, Stationkeeping of aquasiperiodic halo orbit using invariant manifolds, in: ESA Special Pub-lication, Vol. 255 of ESA Special Publication, 1986, pp. 65–70. [5] C. Simó, G. Gómez, J. Llibre, R. Martínez, J. Rodríguez, On the optimal station keeping control of halo orbits, Acta Astronautica 15 (6) (1987) 391–397. 47 [6] N. P. Dwivedi, Deterministic optimal maneuver strategy for multi-target missions, Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications 17 (1-2) (1975) 133–153. [7] K. C. Howell, H. J. Pernicka, Station-keeping method for libration point trajectories, Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 16 (1) (1993) 151–159. [8] D. Folta, T. Pavlak, K. Howell, M. Woodard, D. Woodfork, Stationkeep-ing of Lissajous Trajectories in the Earth-Moon System with Applica-tions to ARTEMIS, in: AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting, San Diego, California, 2010. [9] T. Pavlak, K. Howell, Strategy for Optimal, Long-Term Stationkeeping of Libration Point Orbits in the Earth-Moon System, in: AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2012. [10] D. Folta, T. Pavlak, A. Haapala, K. Howell, M. Woodard, Earth–Moon libration point orbit stationkeeping - Theory modeling, and operations, Acta Astronautica 94 (1) (2013) 421–433. [11] R. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, Performance analy-sis of impulsive station-keeping strategies for cis-lunar orbits with the ephemeris model, Acta Astronautica 198 (2022) 152–160. [12] V. Muralidharan, A. Weiss, U. Kalabic, Control Strategy for Long-Term Station-Keeping on Near-Rectilinear Halo Orbits, in: AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting, Orlando, Florida, 2020. [13] M. Ghorbani, N. Assadian, Optimal station-keeping near Earth–Moon collinear libration points using continuous and impulsive maneuvers, Ad-vances in Space Research 52 (12) (2013) 2067–2079. [14] J. Petersen, L2 Station Keeping Maneuver Strategy for the James Webb Space Telescope, in: AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Portland, Maine, 2019. [15] Y. Lian, G. Gómez, J. J. Masdemont, G. Tang, Station-keeping of real Earth–Moon libration point orbits using discrete-time sliding mode con-trol, Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 19 (10) (2014) 3792–3807. 48 [16] D. Guzzetti, E. M. Zimovan, K. C. Howell, D. C. Davis, Stationkeep-ing Analysis for Spacecraft in lunear Near Rectilinear Halo Orbits, in: AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting, San Antonio, Texas, 2017, pp. 3199–3218. [17] V. Muralidharan, K. C. Howell, Leveraging stretching directions for sta-tionkeeping in Earth-Moon halo orbits, Advances in Space Research 69 (1) (2022) 620–646. [18] R. Shastry, H. Kamhawi, J. D. Frieman, G. C. Soulas, T. G. Gray, T. R. Verhey, C. D. Kachele, G. J. Williams, N. A. Simmons, R. B. Lobbia, S. M. Arestie, V. H. Chaplin, J. Fisher, G. Blackner, E. Forbes, J. Hondagneu, N. A. Branch, J. M. Zubair, H. Watts, 12-kW advanced electric propulsion system hall current thruster qualification and pro-duction status, Journal of Electric Propulsion 4 (1) (2025) 61. [19] D. A. Herman, W. Santiago, H. Kamhawi, J. E. Polk, J. S. Snyder, R. R. Hofer, M. J. Sekerak, The Ion Propulsion System for the Asteroid Redirect Robotic Mission, in: 52nd AIAA/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2016. [20] Y. Qi, A. de Ruiter, Station-keeping strategy for real translunar libration point orbits using continuous thrust, Aerospace Science and Technology 94 (2019) 105376. [21] Y. Qi, A. de Ruiter, Trajectory correction for lunar flyby transfers to li-bration point orbits using continuous thrust, Astrodynamics 6 (3) (2022) 285–300. [22] M. Nazari, W. M. Anthony, E. Butcher, Continuous Thrust Station-keeping in Earth-Moon L1 Halo Orbits Based on LQR control and Flo-quet Theory, in: AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, San Diego, California, 2014. [23] B. L. Jones, R. H. Bishop, H2 optimal halo orbit guidance, Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 16 (6) (1993) 1118–1124. [24] J. Kulkarni, M. Campbell, G. Dullerud, Stabilization of Spacecraft Flight in Halo Orbits: An H∞ Approach, IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 14 (3) (2006) 572–578. 49 [25] Y. Akiyama, M. Bando, S. Hokamoto, Station-keeping and formation flying based on nonlinear output regulation theory, Acta Astronautica 153 (2018) 289–296. [26] A. Nunes, P. Batista, S. Brás, Orbital Station-Keeping in the Earth-Moon System via Nonlinear Backstepping, in: IEEE 19th International Conference on Control & Automation, Tallinn, Estonia, 2025, pp. 75–80. [27] Y. Ulybyshev, Long-Term Station Keeping of Space Station in Lunar Halo Orbits, Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 38 (6) (2015) 1063–1070. [28] M. Elobaid, M. Mattioni, S. Monaco, D. Normand-Cyrot, Station-Keeping of L2 Halo Orbits Under Sampled-Data Model Predictive Con-trol, Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 45 (7) (2022) 1337– 1346. [29] S. Cuevas del Valle, H. Urrutxua, P. Solano-López, R. Gutierrez-Ramon, A. K. Sugihara, Relative Dynamics and Modern Control Strategies for Rendezvous in Libration Point Orbits, Aerospace 9 (12) (2022) 798. [30] M. Shirobokov, S. Trofimov, M. Ovchinnikov, Survey of Station-Keeping Techniques for Libration Point Orbits, Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 40 (5) (2017) 1085–1105. [31] A. Nunes, S. Brás, P. Batista, J. Xavier, Designing trajectories in the Earth-Moon system: a Levenberg-Marquardt approach, preprint sub-mitted to Acta Astronautica (2026). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.18474. [32] V. Szebehely, Theory of Orbits: the Restricted Problem of Three Bodies, Academic Press, 1967. [33] H. Poincaré, Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, Vol. 1, Gauthier-Villars et files, 1892. [34] J. P. Gardner, J. C. Mather, M. Clampin, R. Doyon, M. A. Greenhouse, H. B. Hammel, J. B. Hutchings, P. Jakobsen, S. J. Lilly, K. S. Long, J. I. Lunine, M. J. McCaughrean, M. Mountain, J. Nella, G. H. Rieke, M. J. Rieke, H.-W. Rix, E. P. Smith, G. Sonneborn, M. Stiavelli, H. S. Stockman, R. A. Windhorst, G. S. Wright, The James Webb Space Telescope, Space Science Reviews 123 (4) (2006) 485–606. 50 [35] D. J. McComas, E. R. Christian, N. A. Schwadron, M. Gkioulidou, F. Al-legrini, D. N. Baker, M. Bzowski, G. Clark, C. M. S. Cohen, I. Cohen, C. Collura, M. J. Cully, S. Dalla, M. I. Desai, A. Driesman, D. Eng, N. J. Fox, H. O. Funsten, S. A. Fuselier, A. Galli, J. Giacalone, J. Hahn, K. P. Hegarty, T. Horbury, M. Horanyi, L. M. Kistler, M. A. Kubiak, S. Kubota, S. Livi, N. Lugaz, C. O. Lee, J. Luhmann, W. Matthaeus, D. G. Mitchell, J. G. Mitchell, E. Moebius, S. Pope, E. Provornikova, J. S. Rankin, D. B. Reisenfeld, C. Reno, J. D. Richardson, C. T. Russell, M. M. Shaw-Lecerf, J. Scherrer, R. M. Skoug, M. M. Shen, H. E. Spence, Z. Sternovsky, M. Strumik, J. R. Szalay, M. Tapley, M. Tokumaru, D. L. Turner, S. Weidner, J. Westlake, P. Wurz, G. P. Zank, Interstellar Map-ping and Acceleration Probe: The NASA IMAP Mission, Space Science Reviews 221 (8) (2025) 100. [36] C. Li, W. Zuo, W. Wen, X. Zeng, X. Gao, Y. Liu, Q. Fu, Z. Zhang, Y. Su, X. Ren, F. Wang, J. Liu, W. Yan, X. Tan, D. Liu, B. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Overview of the Chang’e-4 Mission: Opening the Frontier of Scientific Exploration of the Lunar Far Side, Space Science Reviews 217 (2) (2021) 35. [37] G. Gómez, J. J. Masdemont, J. M. Mondelo, Solar system models with a selected set of frequencies, Astronomy and Astrophysics 390 (2) (2002) 733–749. [38] J.-P. Almanza-Soto, K. Howell, Persistence of Restricted Three-Body Problem Normal Form Structures in Higher-Fidelity Models, in: AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Boston, Mas-sachusetts, 2025. [39] B. Park, K. C. Howell, Characterization of Earth-Moon L2 halo analogs in an ephemeris model using the elliptic restricted three-body problem, Advances in Space Research 75 (6) (2025) 5078–5109. [40] R. R. Sanaga, K. Howell, Analyzing the Challenging Region in the Earth-Moon L2 Halo Family via Hill Restricted Four-Body Problem Dynamics, in: AIAA SCITECH Forum, Orlando, Florida, 2024. [41] H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, 3rd Edition, Prentice-Hall, 2002. 51 [42] D. Dirkx, M. Fayolle, G. Garrett, M. Avillez, K. Cowan, S. Cowan, J. En-carnacao, C. Fortuny Lombrana, J. Gaffarel, J. Hener, X. Hu, M. van Nistelrooij, F. Oggionni, M. Plumaris, The open-source astrodynamics Tudatpy software - overview for planetary mission design and science analysis, in: European Planetary Science Congress, Granada, Spain, 2022. [43] NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Three-Body Periodic Orbits, Ac-cessed: 2025-12-11 (2025). URL https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/tools/periodic_orbits.html 

[44] J. Williams, D. Lee, R. Whitley, K. Bokelmann, D. Davis, C. Berry, Tar-geting Cislunar Near Rectilinear Halo Orbits for Human Space Explo-ration, in: AAS/AAIA Space Flight Mechanics Meeting, San Antonio, Texas, 2017. [45] D. Davis, S. Phillips, K. Howell, S. Vutukuri, B. McCarthy, Stationkeep-ing and Transfer Trajectory Design for Spacecraft in Cislunar Space, in: AAS/AAIA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Stevenson, Washing-ton, 2017. [46] E. M. Zimovan-Spreen, S. T. Scheuerle, B. P. Mccarthy, D. C. Davis, K. C. Howell, Baseline Orbit Generation for Near Rectilinear Halo Or-bits, in: AAS/AAIA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Big Sky, Montana, 2023. [47] The MathWorks Inc., Optimization Toolbox version: 25.2 (R2025b), Accessed: 2026-21-01 (2025). URL https://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/index.html 

[48] M. L. McGuire, L. M. Burke, S. L. McCarty, K. J. Hack, R. J. Whitley, D. C. Davis, C. Ocampo, Low Thrust Cis-Lunar Transfers Using a 40 kW-Class Solar Electric Propulsion Spacecraft, in: AAS/AIAA Astro-dynamics Specialist Conference, Stevenson, Washington, 2017. [49] C. Du, O. Starinova, Y. Liu, Low-thrust transfer trajectory planning and tracking in the Earth-Moon elliptic restricted three-body problem, Nonlinear Dynamics 111 (11) (2023) 10201–10216. [50] W. J. Rugh, Linear system theory, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall, 1996. 52 [51] J. Lee, Introduction to Smooth Manifolds, 2nd Edition, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer New York, 2013. 53